TO GENERAL WASHINGTON.

PARIS, November 14, 1786.


SIR,--The house of Le Coulteux, which for some centuries has been the
wealthiest of this place, has it in contemplation to establish a great
company for the fur trade. They propose that partners interested one
half in the establishment, should be American citizens, born and
residing in the United States. Yet if I understood them rightly, they
expect that that half of the company which resides here, should make
the greatest part, or perhaps the whole of the advances, while those
on our side of the water should superintend the details. They had,
at first, thought of Baltimore as the centre of their American
transactions. I have pointed out to them the advantages of Alexandria
for this purpose. They have concluded to take information as to
Baltimore, Philadelphia, and New York, for a principal deposit, and
having no correspondent at Alexandria, have asked me to procure a state
of the advantages of that place, as also to get a recommendation of the
best merchant there, to be adopted as partner and head of the business
there. Skill, punctuality and integrity are the requisites in such a
character. They will decide on their whole information, as to the place
for their principal factory. Being unwilling that Alexandria should lose
its pretensions, I have undertaken to procure them information as to
that place. If they undertake this trade at all, it will be on so great
a scale as to decide the current of the Indian trade to the place they
adopt. I have no acquaintance at Alexandria or in its neighborhood; but,
believing you would feel an interest in the matter, from the same
motives which I do, I venture to ask the favor of you to recommend to me
a proper merchant for their purpose, and to engage some well-informed
person to send me a representation of the advantages of Alexandria, as
the principal deposit of the fur trade.

The author of the political part of the "Encyclop√àdie Methodique"
desired me to examine his article, "Etats Unis." I did so. I found it a
tissue of errors; for, in truth, they know nothing about us here.
Particularly, however, the article "Cincinnati" was a mere philippic
against that institution; in which it appeared that there was an utter
ignorance of facts and motives. I gave him notes on it. He reformed it,
as he supposed, and sent it again to me to revise. In this reformed
state, Colonel Humphreys saw it. I found it necessary to write that
article for him. Before I gave it to him, I showed it to the Marquis de
La Fayette, who made a correction or two. I then sent it to the author.
He used the materials, mixing a great deal of his own with them. In a
work, which is sure of going down to the latest posterity, I thought it
material to set facts to rights as much as possible. The author was
well disposed; but could not entirely get the better of his original
bias. I send you the article as ultimately published. If you find any
material errors in it, and will be so good as to inform me of them, I
shall probably have opportunities of setting this author to rights.
What has heretofore passed between us on this institution, makes it my
duty to mention to you, that I have never heard a person in Europe,
learned or unlearned, express his thoughts on this institution, who did
not consider it as dishonorable and destructive to our governments; and
that every writing which has come out since my arrival here, in which
it is mentioned, considers it, even as now reformed, as the germ whose
development is one day to destroy the fabric we have reared. I did not
apprehend this, while I had American ideas only. But I confess that
what I have seen in Europe has brought me over to that opinion; and
that though the day may be at some distance, beyond the reach of our
lives perhaps, yet it will certainly come, when a single fibre left of
this institution will produce an hereditary aristocracy, which will
change the form of our governments from the best to the worst in the
world. To know the mass of evil which flows from this fatal source, a
person must be in France; he must see the finest soil, the finest
climate, the most compact State, the most benevolent character of
people, and every earthly advantage combined, insufficient to prevent
this scourge from rendering existence a curse to twenty-four out of
twenty-five parts of the inhabitants of this country. With us, the
branches of this institution cover all the States. The southern ones,
at this time, are aristocratical in their dispositions; and, that that
spirit should grow and extend itself, is within the natural order of
things. I do not flatter myself with the immortality of our
governments; but I shall think little also of their longevity, unless
this germ of destruction be taken out. When the society themselves
shall weigh the possibility of evil, against the impossibility of any
good to proceed from this institution, I cannot help hoping they will
eradicate it. I know they wish the permanence of our governments, as
much as any individuals composing them.

An interruption here, and the departure of the gentleman by whom I send
this, oblige me to conclude it, with assurances of the sincere respect
and esteem with which I have the honor to be, dear Sir, your most
obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MONSIEUR CHAS.

PARIS, December 7, 1786.


SIR,--I should with great pleasure have perused your manuscript of the
history of the American Revolution, but that it comes to me in the
moment of my setting out on a journey into the south of France, where I
am to pass the winter. In the few moments of leisure which my
preparations for that journey admitted, I have read some detached
parts, and find that it would have been very interesting to me. In one
of these (page 60), I have taken the liberty of noting a circumstance
which is not true, and to which I believe M. d'Aubertueil first gave a
place in history. In page 75, I observe it says that Congress removed
to Hartford, but this is a misinformation. They never sat there. In
general, I would observe to you, that where there is no other authority
for a fact than the history of d'Aubertueil, it will not be safe to
hazard it. These authors have been led into an infinitude of errors,
probably by trusting to the English papers, or to the European ones,
copied from them. It is impossible to resort to a more impure source. I
am much pleased to find, that you concur in the justice of the
principles which produced our revolution, and have only to wish that I
could have been able to go through the whole work. I have the honor to
be, with much respect, Sir, your most obedient, and most humble
servant.




TO M. DULER.

PARIS, December 8, 1786.


SIR,--The circumstance escaped me of my having had the honor of being
made known to you by Mr. Walker at Charlottesville. However, I should
not have been the less ready, had it been in my power, to have aided
you in procuring employment in some bureau here. But a stranger as I
am, unconnected and unacquainted, my solicitations on your behalf would
be as ineffectual as improper. I should have been happy to have been
able to render you this service, as I am sincerely concerned at the
circumstance which has placed you in need of it.

As to the paper money in your hands, the States have not yet been able
to take final arrangements for its redemption. But, as soon as they
shall get their finances into some order, they will surely pay for it
what it was worth in silver at the time you received it, with interest.
The interest on loan-office certificates is, I think, paid annually in
all the States; and, in some of them, they have begun to make payments
of the principal. These matters are managed for foreigners by the
consul of their nation in America, where they have not a private friend
to attend for them. I have the honor to be, Sir, with much respect,
your most obedient humble servant.




TO MESSRS. WILT, DELMESTRE AND CO.

PARIS, December 11, 1786.


GENTLEMEN,--Your favor of the 6th instant is duly come to hand, as had
done that also of the 8th of November. I was much obliged to you for
your observations and information on the late regulations. I have
received and am still receiving from other quarters, other hints for
its improvement. I cannot propose these to the minister as they arrive,
because, besides the perpetual fatigue to him, the business would not
be so well done in the end. As soon as all the defects of the new
arrangement shall be discovered by a little experience, as well as by
their being submitted to the gentlemen concerned in the commerce, I
shall be able, by bringing all the amendments necessary into a single
proposition, to submit them at once to the consideration of the
minister. It will probably be yet some months before this can be done.
In the meantime, we must be contented to submit a little longer to
those remnants of burthen which still rest on our commerce. In this
view, I will still thank you for any new hints of amendment which may
occur to you in experience, assuring you they shall be put to good use,
when the occasion shall serve. I have the honor to be, with much
respect, Gentlemen, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO JAMES MADISON.

PARIS, December 16, 1786.


DEAR SIR,--After a very long silence, I am at length able to write to
you. An unlucky dislocation of my right wrist, has disabled me from
using that hand, three months. I now begin to use it a little, but with
great pain; so that this letter must be taken up at such intervals as
the state of my hand will permit, and will probably be the work of some
days. Though the joint seems to be well set, the swelling does not
abate, nor the use of it return. I am now, therefore, on the point of
setting out to the south of France, to try the use of some mineral
waters there, by immersion. This journey will be of two or three
months.

I enclose you herein a copy of the letter from the Minister of Finance
to me, making several advantageous regulations for our commerce. The
obtaining this has occupied us a twelve month. I say _us,_ because I
find the Marquis de La Fayette so useful an auxiliary, that
acknowledgments for his co-operation are always due. There remains
still something to do for the articles of rice, turpentine, and ship
duties. What can be done for tobacco, when the late regulation expires,
is very uncertain. The commerce between the United States and this
country being put on a good footing, we may afterwards proceed to try
if anything can be done, to favor our intercourse with her colonies.
Admission into them for our fish and flour, is very desirable; but,
unfortunately, both those articles would raise a competition against
their own.

I find by the public papers, that your commercial convention failed in
point of representation. If it should produce a full meeting in May,
and a broader reformation, it will still be well. To make us one nation
as to foreign concerns, and keep us distinct in domestic ones, gives
the outline of the proper division of powers between the general and
particular governments. But, to enable the federal head to exercise the
powers given it to best advantage, it should be organized as the
particular ones are, into legislative, executive, and judiciary. The
first and last are already separated. The second should be. When last
with Congress, I often proposed to members to do this, by making of the
committee of the States, an executive committee during the recess of
Congress, and, during its sessions, to appoint a committee to receive
and despatch all executive business, so that Congress itself should
meddle only with what should be legislative. But I question if any
Congress (much less all successively) can have self-denial enough to go
through with this distribution. The distribution, then, should be
imposed on them. I find Congress have reversed their division of the
western States, and proposed to make them fewer and larger. This is
reversing the natural order of things. A tractable people may be
governed in large bodies; but, in proportion as they depart from this
character, the extent of their government must be less. We see into
what small divisions the Indians are obliged to reduce their societies.
This measure, with the disposition to shut up the Mississippi, gives me
serious apprehensions of the severance of the eastern and western parts
of our confederacy. It might have been made the interest of the western
States to remain united with us, by managing their interests honestly,
and for their own good. But, the moment we sacrifice their interests to
our own, they will see it better to govern themselves. The moment they
resolve to do this, the point is settled. A forced connection is
neither our interest, nor within our power.

The Virginia act for religious freedom has been received with infinite
approbation in Europe, and propagated with enthusiasm. I do not mean by
the governments, but by the individuals who compose them. It has been
translated into French and Italian, has been sent to most of the courts
of Europe, and has been the best evidence of the falsehood of those
reports which stated us to be in anarchy. It is inserted in the new
"Encyclop√àdie," and is appearing in most of the publications respecting
America. In fact, it is comfortable to see the standard of reason at
length erected, after so many ages, during which the human mind has
been held in vassalage by kings, priests, and nobles; and it is
honorable for us, to have produced the first legislature who had the
courage to declare, that the reason of man may be trusted with the
formation of his own opinions.

                 *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

I thank you for your communications in Natural History. The several
instances of trees, &c., found far below the surface of the earth, as
in the case of Mr. Hay's well, seem to set the reason of man at
defiance.

I am, dear Sir, with sincere esteem, your friend and servant.




TO CHARLES THOMPSON.

PARIS, December 17, 1786.


DEAR SIR,--A dislocation of my right wrist has for three months past,
disabled me from writing except with my left hand, which was too slow
and awkward to be employed often. I begin to have so much use of my
wrist, as to be able to write, but it is slowly, and in pain. I take
the first moment I can, however, to acknowledge the receipt of your
letters of April the 6th, July the 8th and 30th. In one of these, you
say, you have not been able to learn, whether, in the new mills in
London, steam is the immediate mover of the machinery, or raises water
to move it? It is the immediate mover. The power of this agent, though
long known, is but now beginning to be applied to the various purposes
of which it is susceptible. You observe that Whitehurst supposes it to
have been the agent, which bursting the earth, threw it up into
mountains and valleys. You ask me what I think of his book? I find in
it many interesting facts brought together, and many ingenious
commentaries on them. But there are great chasms in his facts, and
consequently in his reasoning. These he fills up by suppositions, which
may be as reasonably denied as granted. A sceptical reader therefore,
like myself, is left in the lurch. I acknowledge, however, he makes
more use of fact, than any other writer on a theory of the earth. But I
give one answer to all these theorists. That is as follows. They all
suppose the earth a created existence. They must suppose a creator
then; and that he possessed power and wisdom to a great degree. As he
intended the earth for the habitation of animals and vegetables, is it
reasonable to suppose, he made two jobs of his creation, that he first
made a chaotic lump and set it into rotatory motion, and then waited
the millions of ages necessary to form itself? That when it had done
this, he stepped in a second time, to create the animals and plants
which were to inhabit it? As the hand of a creator is to be called in,
it may as well be called in at one stage of the process as another. We
may as well suppose he created the earth at once, nearly in the state
in which we see it, fit for the preservation of the beings he placed on
it. But it is said, we have a proof that he did not create it in its
present solid form, but in a state of fluidity; because its present
shape of an oblate spheroid is precisely that which a fluid mass
revolving on its axis would assume.

I suppose that the same equilibrium between gravity and centrifugal
force, which would determine a fluid mass into the form of an oblate
spheroid, would determine the wise creator of that mass, if he made it
in a solid state, to give it the same spheroidical form. A revolving
fluid will continue to change its shape, till it attains that in which
its principles of contrary motion are balanced. For if you suppose them
not balanced, it will change its form. Now, the same balanced form is
necessary for the preservation of a revolving solid. The creator,
therefore, of a revolving solid, would make it an oblate spheroid, that
figure alone admitting a perfect equilibrium. He would make it in that
form, for another reason; that is, to prevent a shifting of the axis of
rotation. Had he created the earth perfectly spherical, its axis might
have been perpetually shifting, by the influence of the other bodies of
the system; and by placing the inhabitants of the earth successively
under its poles, it might have been depopulated; whereas, being
spheroidical, it has but one axis on which it can revolve in
equilibrio. Suppose the axis of the earth to shift forty-five degrees;
then cut it into one hundred and eighty slices, making every section in
the plane of a circle of latitude, perpendicular to the axis: every one
of these slices, except the equatorial one, would be unbalanced, as
there would be more matter on one side of its axis than on the other.
There could be but one diameter drawn through such a slice, which would
divide it into two equal parts. On every other possible diameter, the
parts would hang unequal. This would produce an irregularity in the
diurnal rotation. We may, therefore, conclude it impossible for the
poles of the earth to shift, if it was made spheroidically; and that it
would be made spheroidical, though solid, to obtain this end. I use
this reasoning only on the supposition that the earth has had a
beginning. I am sure I shall read your conjectures on this subject with
great pleasure, though I bespeak, beforehand, a right to indulge my
natural incredulity and scepticism. The pain in which I write awakens
me here from my reverie, and obliges me to conclude with compliments to
Mrs. Thompson, and assurances to yourself of the esteem and affection
with which I am sincerely, dear Sir, your friend and servant.

P. S. Since writing the preceding, I have had a conversation on the
subject of the steam mills, with the famous Boulton, to whom those of
London belong, and who is here at this time. He compares the effect of
steam with that of horses, in the following manner: Six horses, aided
with the most advantageous combination of the mechanical powers
hitherto tried, will grind six bushels of flour in an hour; at the end
of which time they are all in a foam, and must rest. They can work
thus, six hours in the twenty-four, grinding thirty-six bushels of
flour, which is six to each horse, for the twenty-four hours. His steam
mill in London consumes one hundred and twenty bushels of coal in
twenty-four hours, turns ten pair of stones, which grind eight bushels
of flour an hour each, which is nineteen hundred and twenty bushels in
the twenty-four hours. This makes a peck and a half of coal perform
exactly as much as a horse, in one day, can perform.




TO COLONEL MONROE.

PARIS, December 18, 1786.


DEAR SIR,--Your letters of August the 19th and October the 12th, have
come duly to hand. My last to you was of the 11th of August. Soon after
that date I got my right wrist dislocated, which has, till now,
deprived me of the use of that hand; and even now, I can use it but
slowly, and with pain. The revisal of the Congressional intelligence
contained in your letters, makes me regret the loss of it on your
departure. I feel, too, the want of a person there, to whose discretion
I can trust confidential communications, and on whose friendship I can
rely against the unjust designs of malevolence. I have no reason to
suppose I have enemies in Congress; yet it is too possible to be
without that fear. Some symptoms make me suspect, that my proceedings
to redress the abusive administration of tobacco by the Farmers General
have indisposed towards me a powerful person in Philadelphia, who was
profiting from that abuse. An expression in the enclosed letter of M.
de Calonnes, would seem to imply, that I had asked the abolition of Mr.
Morris's contract. I never did. On the contrary, I always observed to
them, that it would be unjust to annul that contract. I was led to
this, by principles both of justice and interest. Of interest, because
that contract would keep up the price of tobacco here, to thirty-four,
thirty-six, and thirty-eight livres, from which it will fall when it
shall no longer have that support. However, I have done what was right,
and I will not so far wound my privilege of doing that, without regard
to any man's interest, as to enter into any explanations of this
paragraph with him. Yet I esteem him highly, and suppose that hitherto
he had esteemed me. You will see by Calonne's letter, that we are doing
what we can, to get the trade of the United States put on a good
footing. I am now about setting out on a journey to the south of
France, one object of which is to try the mineral waters there, for the
restoration of my hand; but another is, to visit all the seaports where
we have trade, and to hunt up all the inconveniences under which it
labors, in order to get them rectified. I shall visit, and carefully
examine too, the canal of Languedoc. On my return, which will be early
in the spring, I shall send you several livraisons of the
"Encyclop√àdie," and the plan of your house. I wish to heaven, you may
continue in the disposition to fix it in Albemarle. Short will
establish himself there, and perhaps Madison may be tempted to do so.
This will be society enough, and it will be the great sweetener of our
lives. Without society, and a society to our taste, men are never
contented. The one here supposed, we can regulate to our minds, and we
may extend our regulations to the sumptuary department, so as to set a
good example to a country which needs it, and to preserve our own
happiness clear of embarrassment. You wish not to engage in the
drudgery of the bar. You have two asylums from that. Either to accept a
seat in the Council, or in the judiciary department. The latter,
however, would require a little previous drudgery at the bar, to
qualify you to discharge your duty with satisfaction to yourself.
Neither of these would be inconsistent with a continued residence in
Albemarle. It is but twelve hours' drive in a sulky from
Charlottesville to Richmond, keeping a fresh horse always at the
halfway, which would be a small annual expense. I am in hopes that Mrs.
M. will have in her domestic cares, occupation and pleasure, sufficient
to fill her time, and insure her against the _tedium vit√ä_; that she
will find, that the distractions of a town, and the waste of life under
these, can bear no comparison with the tranquil happiness of domestic
life. If her own experience has not yet taught her this truth, she has
in its favor the testimony of one who has gone through the various
scenes of business, of bustle, of office, of rambling, and of quiet
retirement, and who can assure her, that the latter is the only point
upon which the mind can settle at rest. Though not clear of
inquietudes, because no earthly situation is so, they are fewer in
number, and mixed with more objects of contentment than in any other
mode of life. But I must not philosophise too much with her, lest I
give her too serious apprehensions of a friendship I shall impose on
her. I am with very great esteem, dear Sir, your sincere friend and
servant.




TO HIS EXCELLENCY MR. ADAMS.

PARIS, December 20, 1786.


DEAR SIR,--Colonel Franks will have the honor of delivering you the
treaty with the Emperor of Morocco, and all its appendages. You will
perceive, by Mr. Barclay's letter, that it is not necessary that any
body should go back to Morocco to exchange ratifications. He says,
however, that it will be necessary that Fennish receive some testimony
that we approve the treaty; and as, by the acts of Congress, our
signature is necessary to give validity to it, I have had duplicates of
ratifications prepared, which I have signed, and now send you. If you
approve and sign them, send one back to me to be forwarded to Fennish,
through Mr. Carmichael. Perhaps a joint letter should be written to
Fennish; if you think so, be so good as to write and sign one and send
it with the ratification, and I will sign and forward it. The other
ratification is to go to Congress. Colonel Franks wishes to proceed
with the papers to that body. He should do it, I think, immediately, as
Mr. Jay, in a letter to me of October 26th, says that Congress have
heard through the French Charg√à des Affaires, that the treaty was
signed, and they wonder they have not heard it from us.

I enclose you a copy of a letter from Mr. Lambe, by which you will
perceive he does not propose to quit Alicant. I will forward the
resolution of Congress to Mr. Carmichael, which was enclosed in yours
of November 30th, to see if that will move him. As the turn of this
resolution admits a construction that Congress may think our original
appointment of him censurable, I have, as in justice I ought, in a
letter to Mr. Jay, taken on myself the blame of having proposed him to
you, if any blame were due. I have enclosed him a copy of my letter to
you of September 24, 1785. Mr. Barclay has proposed to go to Alicant to
settle Lambe's accounts, and asked to be strengthened with our
authority. If Lambe will obey the resolve of Congress, it will be
better to let him go and settle his account there. But if he will not
go back, perhaps it might not be amiss for Mr. Barclay to have
instructions from us to require a settlement, those instructions to be
used in that case only. If you think so, be so good as to write a joint
letter and send it to me. But this, if done at all, should be done
immediately. How much money has Lambe drawn? I have suggested to Mr.
Jay the expediency of putting the Barbary business into Carmichael's
hands, or sending somebody from America, in consideration of our
separate residence and our distance from the scene of negotiation.

I had seen, without alarm, accounts of the disturbances in the East.
But Mr. Jay's letter on the subject had really affected me. However,
yours sets me to rights. I can never fear that things will go far wrong
where common sense has fair play. I but just begin to use my pen a
little with my right hand, but with pain. Recommending myself,
therefore, to the friendship of Mrs. Adams, I must conclude here with
assurances of the sincere esteem of, dear Sir, your friend and servant.

P. S. Should a Mr. Maury, of Virginia, but now a merchant of Liverpool,
present himself to you, I recommend him to your notice, as my old
school-fellow, and a man of the most solid integrity.




TO MR. HOPKINSON.

PARIS, December 23, 1786.


DEAR SIR,--My last letter to you was dated August 14th. Yours of May
27th and June 28th, were not then received, but have been since. I take
the liberty of putting under your cover another letter to Mrs. Champis,
as also an inquiry after a Dr. Griffiths. A letter to M. le Vieillard,
from the person he had consulted about the essence L'Orient, will
convey to you the result of my researches into that article. Your
spring-block for assisting a vessel in sailing cannot be tried here,
because the Seine, being not more than about forty toises wide, and
running swiftly, there is no such thing on it as a vessel with sails. I
thank you for the volume of the Philadelphia transactions, which came
safely to hand, and is, in my opinion, a very valuable volume, and
contains many precious papers. The paccan-nut is, as you conjecture,
the Illinois nut. The former is the vulgar name south of the Potomac,
as also with the Indians and Spaniards, and enters also into the
Botanical name which is Juglano Paccan. I have many volumes of the
"Encyclop√àdie" for yourself and Dr. Franklin; but, as a winter passage
is bad for books, and before the spring the packets will begin to sail
from Havre to New York, I shall detain them till then. You must not
presume too strongly that your comb-footed bird is known to M. de
Buffon. He did not know our panther. I gave him the stripped skin of
one I bought in Philadelphia, and it presents him a new species, which
will appear in his next volumes. I have convinced him that our deer is
not a Chevreuil, and would you believe that many letters to different
acquaintances in Virginia, where this animal is so common, have never
enabled me to present him with a large pair of their horns, a blue and
red skin stuffed, to show him their colors, at different seasons. He
has never seen the horns of what we call the elk. This would decide
whether it be an elk or a deer. I am very much pleased with your
project on the Harmonica, and the prospect of your succeeding in the
application of keys to it. It will be the greatest present which has
been made to the musical world this century, not excepting the
Piano-forte. If its tone approaches that given by the finger as nearly
only as the harpsichord does that of the harp, it will be very
valuable. I have lately examined a foot-bass newly invented here, by
the celebrated Krumfoltz. It is precisely a piano-forte, about ten feet
long, eighteen inches broad, and nine inches deep. It is of one octave
only, from fa to fa. The part where the keys are, projects at the side
in order to lengthen the levers of the keys. It is placed on the floor,
and the harpsichord or other piano-forte is set over it, the foot
acting in concert on that, while the fingers play on this. There are
three unison chords to every note, of strong brass wire, and the lowest
have wire wrapped on them as the lowest in the piano-forte. The chords
give a fine, clear, deep tone, almost like the pipe of an organ. Have
they connected you with our mint? My friend Monroe promised me he would
take care for you in that, or perhaps the establishment of that at New
York may have been incompatible with your residence in Philadelphia. A
person here has invented a method of coining the French √àcu of six
livres, so as to strike both faces and the edge at one stroke, and
makes a coin as beautiful as a medal. No country has ever yet produced
such a coin. They are made cheaper, too. As yet, he has only made a few
to show the perfection of his manner. I am endeavoring to procure one
to send to Congress as a model for their coinage. They will consider
whether, on establishing a new mint, it will be worth while to buy his
machines, if he will furnish them. A dislocation of my right wrist,
which happened to me about a month after the date of my last letter to
you, has disabled me from writing three months. I do it now in pain,
and only in cases of necessity, or of strong inclination, having as yet
no other use of my hand. I put under your cover a letter from my
daughter to her friend. She joins me in respects to your good mother,
to Mrs. Hopkinson and yourself, to whom I proffer assurances of the
esteem with which I am, dear Sir, your sincere friend and servant.




TO HIS EXCELLENCY DR. FRANKLIN.

PARIS, December 23, 1786.


DEAR SIR,--I have received your favor of October 8, but the volume of
transactions mentioned to come with it, did not; but I had received one
from Mr. Hopkinson. You also mention the diplomas it covered for other
persons, and some order of the society relative to myself, which I
supposed were omitted by accident, and will come by some other
conveyance. So far as relates to myself, whatever the order was, I beg
leave to express to you my sense of their favor, and wish to merit it.
I have several _livraisons_ of the "Encyclop√àdie" for yourself and Mr.
Hopkinson, which shall be sent in the spring, when they will be less
liable to injury. Some books also which I received from Baron Blome
must await that conveyance. I receive some discouraging accounts of the
temper of the people in our new government, yet were I to judge only
from the accounts given in the public papers, I should not fear their
passing over without injury. I wish you may have given your opinion of
them to some of your friends here, as your experience and knowledge of
men would give us more confidence in your opinion. Russia and the Porte
have patched up an accommodation through the mediation of this court.
The coolness between Spain and Naples will remain, and will occasion
the former to cease intermeddling with the affairs of the latter. The
Dutch affairs are still to be settled. The new King of Prussia is more
earnest in supporting the cause of the slaveholder than his uncle was,
and in general an affectation begins to show itself of differing from
his uncle. There is some fear of his throwing himself into the Austrian
scale in the European division of power. Our treaty with Morocco is
favorably concluded through the influence of Spain. That with Algiers
affords no expectation. We have been rendered anxious here about your
health, by hearing you have had a severe attack of your gout.
Remarkable deaths are the Duchess of Chabot, of the House of
Rochefoucault, Beaujon, and Peyronet, the architect who built the
bridge of Neuilly, and was to have begun one the next spring from the
Place Louis XV. to the Palais Bourbon. A dislocated wrist not yet
re-established, obliges me to conclude here with assurances of the
perfect esteem and respect with which I have the honor to be, your
Excellency's most obedient, and most humble servant.

P. S. Will you permit my respects to your grandson, Mr. Franklin, to
find their place here?




TO MR. STILES.

PARIS, December 24, 1786.


SIR,--I feel myself very much honored by the degree which has been
conferred on me by the Senatus Academicus of Yale College, and I beg
leave, through you, Sir, to express to them how sensible I am of this
honor, and that it is to their and your indulgence, and not to any
merit of my own, that I am indebted for it.

The commotions that have taken place in America, as far as they are yet
known to me, offer nothing threatening. They are a proof that the
people have liberty enough, and I could not wish them less than they
have. If the happiness of the mass of the people can be secured at the
expense of a little tempest now and then, or even of a little blood, it
will be a precious purchase. "Malo libertatem periculosam quam quietem
servitutem." Let common sense and common honesty have fair play, and
they will soon set things to rights.

The bickerings between Russia and the Porte are quieted for the moment.
The coolness between the Kings of Spain and Naples will remain, but
will have no other consequence than that of the former withdrawing from
interference with the affairs of the latter. The present King of
Prussia pushes the interest of the Stadtholder more zealously than his
uncle did. There have been fears that he might throw himself into the
Austrian scale, which would greatly derange the European balance. This
country is firm in support of the patriotic party in the United
Netherlands.

We have made an advantageous treaty with Morocco, but with Algiers
nothing is done. From what I learn from the temper of my countrymen and
their tenaciousness of money, it will be more easy to raise ships and
men to fight these pirates into reason than money to bribe them. I wish
that something could be done in some form or another to open the
Mediterranean to us. You will have seen that France is endeavoring to
relieve and encourage our commerce with her.

The arts and sciences offering nothing new at this moment worth
communicating to you, I shall only add assurances of the respect and
esteem with which I have the honor to be, dear Sir, your most obedient,
and most humble servant.




TO M. DUMAS.

PARIS, December 25, 1786.


SIR,--A dislocation of my right wrist has for upwards of three months
prevented my writing to you. I begin to use it a little for the pen;
but it is with great pain. To this cause alone I hope you will ascribe
that I have acknowledged at one time the receipt of so many of your
letters. Their dates are September 12, 26, October 6, 17, 19, 23,
November 3, 17, December 1, and there is one without date. They were
communicated to the Marquis de LaFayette according to your desire, and
those to Mr. Jay have been forwarded from time to time as private
conveyances occurred, except some of the last for which no such
conveyance has occurred till now. A gentleman is setting out for
London, and from thence for New York.

We receive news from America of collections of the people in three or
four instances in the Eastern States, demanding delays in the
proceedings of the courts of justice. Those States, as you know,
depended before the war chiefly on their whale oil and fish. The former
was consumed in London, but, being now loaded with heavy duties, cannot
go there. Much of their fish went up the Mediterranean, now shut to us
by the piratical States. Their debts, therefore, press them, while the
means of payment have lessened. The mobs, however, separated without a
single injury having been offered to the person or property of any one,
nor did they continue twenty-four hours in any one place. This country
has opened a market for their whale oil, and we have made a good treaty
of peace with Morocco. But with Algiers we can do nothing. An American
paper has published a letter, as from me to the Count de Vergennes, on
the subject of our productions of tobacco and rice. It is surreptitious
and falsified; and both the true and untrue parts very improper for the
public eye. How a newswriter of America got at it, is astonishing, and
with what views it had been altered. I will be much obliged to you if
you will endeavor to prevent its publication in the Leyden Gazette.

The following question I take the liberty of proposing to you
confidentially. This country wants money in its treasury. Some
individuals have proposed to buy our debt of twenty-four millions at a
considerable discount. I have informed Congress of it, and suggested to
them the expediency of borrowing this sum in Holland, if possible, as
well to prevent loss to this country as to draw all their money
transactions to one point. But could they borrow the money in Holland?
I would be obliged to you for your opinion on this question, as it
would decide me in pressing this matter further on Congress, or letting
it drop. It will readily occur to you that the answer should come
through the hands of your ambassador here alone. The pain in which I
write obliges me, after many thanks for the interesting details of
transactions in your country, to assure you of the esteem and respect
with which I have the honor to be, Sir, your most obedient, and most
humble servant.




TO MR. CARMICHAEL.

PARIS, December 26, 1786.


DEAR SIR,--A note from me of the 22d of September, apprised you it
would be some time before I should be able to answer your letters. I
did not then expect it would have been so long.

I enclose herein a resolution of Congress, recalling Mr. Lambe, which I
will beg the favor of you to have delivered him. I have written to Mr.
Adams on the subject of directing him to settle with Mr. Barclay, and
attend his answer. In the meantime, I am not without hopes Mr. Barclay
has done the business. I send also a note desiring Mr. Lambe to deliver
you his cypher, and a copy of a letter from the Minister of Finance
here, to me, announcing several regulations in favor of our commerce.

My "Notes on Virginia," having been hastily written, need abundance of
corrections. Two or three of these are so material, that I am
reprinting a few leaves to substitute for the old. As soon as these
shall be ready, I will beg your acceptance of a copy. I shall be proud
to be permitted to send a copy, also, to the Count de Campomanes, as a
tribute to his science and his virtues. You will find in them that the
Natural Bridge has found an admirer in me also. I should be happy to
make with you the tour of the curiosities you will find therein
mentioned. That kind of pleasure surpasses much, in my estimation,
whatever I find on this side the Atlantic. I sometimes think of
building a little hermitage at the Natural Bridge (for it is my
property) and of passing there a part of the year at least.

I have received American papers to the 1st of November. Some tumultuous
meetings of the people have taken place in the eastern States; _i. e._
one in Massachusetts, one in Connecticut, and one in New Hampshire.
Their principal demand was, a respite in the judiciary proceedings. No
injury was done, however, in a single instance, to the person or
property of any one, nor did the tumult continue twenty-four hours in
any one instance. In Massachusetts, this was owing to the discretion
which the malcontents still preserved; in Connecticut and New
Hampshire, the body of the people rose in support of government, and
obliged the malcontents to go to their homes. In the last-mentioned
State, they seized about forty, who were in jail for trial. It is
believed this incident will strengthen our government. Those people are
not entirely without excuse. Before the war, these States depended on
their whale oil and fish. The former was consumed in England, and much
of the latter in the Mediterranean. The heavy duties on American whale
oil, now required in England, exclude it from that market; and the
Algerines exclude them from bringing their fish into the Mediterranean.
France is opening her ports for their oil, but in the meanwhile, their
ancient debts are pressing them, and they have nothing to pay with. The
Massachusetts Assembly, too, in their zeal for paying their public
debt, had laid a tax too heavy to be paid in the circumstances of their
State. The Indians seem disposed, too, to make war on us. These
complicated causes, determined Congress to increase their forces to two
thousand men. The latter was the sole object avowed, yet the former
entered for something into the measure. However, I am satisfied the
good sense of the people is the strongest army our government can ever
have, and that it will not fail them. The commercial convention at
Annapolis, was not full enough to do business. They found, too, their
appointments too narrow, being confined to the article of commerce.
They have proposed a meeting in Philadelphia in May, and that it may be
authorized to propose amendments of whatever is defective in the
federal constitution.

When I was in England, I formed a portable copying press, on the
principles of the large one they make here, for copying letters. I had
a model made there, and it has answered perfectly. A workman here has
made several from that model. The itinerant temper of your court will,
I think, render one of these useful to you. You must, therefore, do me
the favor to accept of one. I have it now in readiness, and shall send
it by the way of Bayonne, to the care of Mr. Alexander there, unless
Don Miguel de Lardizabal can carry it with him.

My hand admonishes me it is time to stop, and that I must defer writing
to Mr. Barclay till to-morrow.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the highest esteem and
respect, dear Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MR. VAUGHAN.

PARIS, December 29, 1786.


SIR,--When I had the honor of seeing you in London, you were so kind as
to permit me to trouble you sometimes with my letters, and particularly
on the subject of mathematical or philosophical instruments. Such a
correspondence will be too agreeable to me, and at the same time, too
useful, not to avail myself of your permission. It has been an opinion
pretty generally received among philosophers, that the atmosphere of
America is more humid than that of Europe. Monsieur de Buffon makes
this hypothesis one of the two pillars whereon he builds his system of
the degeneracy of animals in America. Having had occasion to controvert
this opinion of his, as to the degeneracy of animals there, I expressed
a doubt of the fact assumed, that our climates are more moist. I did
not know of any experiments which might authorize a denial of it.
Speaking afterwards on the subject with Dr. Franklin, he mentioned to
me the observations he had made on a case of magnets, made for him by
Mr. Nairne in London. Of these you will see a detail, in the second
volume of the American Philosophical Transactions, in a letter from Dr.
Franklin to Mr. Nairne, wherein he recommends to him to take up the
principle therein explained, and endeavor to make an hygrometer, which,
taking slowly the temperature of the atmosphere, shall give its mean
degree of moisture, and enable us thus to make with more certainty, a
comparison between the humidities of different climates. May I presume
to trouble you with an inquiry of Mr. Nairne, whether he has executed
the Doctor's idea, and if he has, to get him to make for me a couple of
the instruments he may have contrived? They should be made of the same
piece, and under like circumstances, that sending one to America, I may
rely on its indications there, compared with those of the one I shall
retain here. Being in want of a set of magnets also, I would be glad if
he would at the same time send me a set, the case of which should be
made as Dr. Franklin describes his to have been, so that I may repeat
his experiment. Colonel Smith will do me the favor to receive these
things from Mr. Nairne, and to pay him for them.

I think Mr. Rittenhouse never published an invention of his in this
way, which was a very good one. It was of an hygrometer which, like the
common ones, was to give the actual moisture of the air. He has two
slips of mahogany about five inches long, three-fourths of an inch
broad, and one-tenth of an inch thick, the one having the grain running
lengthwise, and the other crosswise. These are glued together by their
faces, so as to form a piece five inches long, three-fourths of an inch
broad, and one-third of an inch thick, which is stuck by its lower end
into a little plinth of wood, presenting their edge to the view. The
fibres of the wood you know are dilated, but not lengthened by
moisture. The slip, therefore, whose grain is lengthwise, becomes a
standard, retaining always the same precise length. That which has its
grain crosswise, dilates with moisture, and contracts for the want of
it. If the right hand piece be the cross grained one, when the air is
very moist, it lengthens, and forces its companion to form a kind of
interior annulus of a circle on the left. When the air is dry, it
contracts, draws its companion to the right, and becomes itself the
interior annulus. In order to show this dilatation and contraction, an
index is fixed on the upper end of two of the slips; a plate of metal
or wood is fastened to the front of the plinth, so as to cover the two
slips from the eye. A slit, being nearly the portion of a circle, is
cut in this plate, so that the shank of the index may play freely
through its whole range. On the edge of the slit is a graduation. The
objection to this instrument is, that it is not fit for comparative
observations, because no two pieces of wood being of the same texture
exactly, no two will yield exactly alike to the same agent. However, it
is less objectionable on this account, than most of the substances
used. Mr. Rittenhouse had a thought of trying ivory; but I do not know
whether he executed it. All these substances not only vary from one
another at the same time, but from themselves at different times. All
of them, however, have some peculiar advantages, and I think this, on
the whole, appeared preferable to any other I had ever seen. Not
knowing whether you had heard of this instrument, and supposing it
would amuse you, I have taken the liberty of detailing it to you.

I beg you to be assured of the sentiments of perfect esteem and respect
with which I have the honor to be, Sir, your most obedient, and most
humble servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

PARIS, December 31, 1786.


SIR,--I had the honor of addressing you on the 12th of the last month;
since which, your favor of October the 12th has been received,
enclosing a copy of the resolution of Congress for recalling Mr. Lambe.
My letter by Mr. Randall informed you that we had put an end to his
powers, and required him to repair to Congress. I lately received a
letter from him, dated Alicant, October the 10th, of which I have the
honor to enclose you a copy; by which, you will perceive that the
circumstance of ill health, either true or false, is urged for his not
obeying our call. I shall immediately forward the order of Congress. I
am not without fear, that some misapplication of the public money may
enter into the causes of his declining to return. The moment that I saw
a symptom of this in his conduct, as it was a circumstance which did
not admit the delay of consulting Mr. Adams, I wrote to Mr. Carmichael,
to stop any moneys which he might have in the hands of his banker. I am
still unable to judge whether he is guilty of this or not, as by the
arrangements with Mr. Adams, who alone had done business with the
bankers of the United States, in Holland, Mr. Lambe's drafts were to be
made on him, and I know not what their amount has been. His drafts
could not have been negotiated, if made on us both, at places so
distant. Perhaps it may be thought, that the appointment of Mr. Lambe
was censurable in the moment in which it was made. It is a piece of
justice, therefore, which I owe to Mr. Adams, to declare that the
proposition went first from me to him. I take the liberty of enclosing
you a copy of my letter to Mr. Adams, of September the 24th, 1785, in
which that proposition was made. It expresses the motives operating on
my mind in that moment, as well as the cautions I thought it necessary
to take. To these must be added, the difficulty of finding an American
in Europe fit for the business, and willing to undertake it. I knew
afterwards, that Dr. Bancroft (who is named in the letter) could not,
on account of his own affairs, have accepted even a primary
appointment. I think it evident, that no appointment could have
succeeded without a much greater sum of money.

I am happy to find that Mr. Barclay's mission has been attended with
complete success. For this we are indebted, unquestionably, to the
influence and good offices of the court of Madrid. Colonel Franks, the
bearer of this, will have the honor to put into your hands the original
of the treaty, with other papers accompanying it. It will appear by
these, that Mr. Barclay has conducted himself with a degree of
intelligence and of good faith, which reflects the highest honor on
him.

A copy of a letter from Captain O'Bryan to Mr. Carmichael, is also
herewith enclosed. The information it contains will throw farther light
on the affairs of Algiers. His observations on the difficulties which
arise from the distance of Mr. Adams and myself from that place, and
from one another, and the delays occasioned by this circumstance, are
certainly just. If Congress should propose to revive the negotiations,
they will judge whether it will not be more expedient to send a person
to Algiers, who can be trusted with full powers; and also whether a
mission to Constantinople may not be previously necessary. Before I
quit this subject, I must correct an error in the letter of Captain
O'Bryan. Mr. Lambe was not limited, as he says, to one hundred, but to
two hundred dollars apiece for our prisoners. This was the price which
has been just paid for a large number of French prisoners, and this was
our guide.

I have the honor to be, with the most perfect esteem and respect, Sir,
your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO SAMUEL OSGOOD.

PARIS, January 5, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I am desired to forward to you the enclosed queries, and to
ask the favor of you to give such an answer to them, as may not give
you too much trouble. Those which stand foremost on the paper, can be
addressed only to your complaisance; but the last may possibly be
interesting to your department, and to the United States. I mean those
which suggest the possibility of borrowing money in Europe, the
principal of which shall be ultimately payable in land, and in the
meantime a good interest. You know best whether the suggestion can be
turned to any profit, and whether it will be worth while to introduce
any proposition to Congress thereon. Among the possible shapes into
which a matter of this kind may be formed, the following is one: Let us
suppose the public lands to be worth a dollar, hard money, the acre. If
we should ask of a moneyed man a loan of one hundred dollars, payable
with one hundred acres of land at the end of ten years, and in the
meantime carrying an interest of five per cent., this would be more
disadvantageous to the lender than a common loan, payable ultimately in
cash. But if we should say, we will deliver you the one hundred acres
of land immediately, which is in fact an immediate payment of the
principal, and will nevertheless pay your interest of five per cent.,
for ten years, this offers a superior advantage, and might tempt money
holders. But what should we in fact receive, in this way, for our
lands? Thirty-seven dollars and one-fourth, being left in Europe, on an
interest of five per cent., would pay annually the interest of the one
hundred dollars for ten years. There would remain then only sixty-two
dollars and three-quarters, for the one hundred acres of land, that is
to say, about two-thirds of its price. Congress can best determine,
whether any circumstance in our situation, should induce us to get rid
of any of our debts in that way. I beg you to understand, that I have
named rates of interest, term of payment, and price of land, merely to
state the case, and without the least knowledge that a loan could be
obtained on these terms. It remains to inform you from whom this
suggestion comes. The person from whom I receive it, is a Monsieur
Claviere, connected with the moneyed men of Amsterdam. He is, on behalf
of a company there, actually treating with the Comptroller General
here, for the purchase of our debt to this country, at a considerable
discount. Whether he has an idea of offering a loan to us, on terms
such as I have above spoken of, I know not; nor do I know that he is
authorized to make the suggestion he has made. If the thing should be
deemed worthy the attention of Congress, they can only consider it as a
possibility, and take measures to avail themselves of it, if the
possibility turns out in their favor, and not to be disappointed if it
does not. Claviere's proposition not being formal enough for me to make
an official communication of it, you will make what use of it you see
best. I am, with very sincere esteem and attachment, dear Sir, your
most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO M. DE CALONNE.

PARIS, January 7, 1787.


SIR,--I had the honor, on the 2d of November last, to acknowledge the
receipt of your Excellency's letter of October the 22d, wherein you are
so good as to communicate to me the arrangements which the King had
been pleased to make for the encouragement of the commerce of the
United States of America with his subjects. I immediately made known
the same to the agents of the United States in the several seaports of
this kingdom, that they might give information thereof to the persons
concerned in that commerce. Unacquainted with the forms in which his
Majesty usually declares his will in cases of this kind, and the manner
in which it is communicated to the officers of the customs at the
seaports, I am unable to answer those agents who inform me that the
officers of the customs and farms do not as yet consider themselves
bound to conform to the new regulations. I take the liberty, therefore,
of soliciting your Excellency's interposition for the issuing such
orders as may be necessary for carrying into effect the gracious
intentions of the King, and of repeating the assurances of those
sentiments of perfect respect and esteem, with which I have the honor
to be your Excellency's most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

PARIS, January 9, 1787.


SIR,--My last of December the 31st, acknowledged the receipt of yours
of October the 12th, as the present does those of October the 3d, 9th,
and 27th, together with the resolution of Congress of October the 16th,
on the claim of Shweighauser. I will proceed in this business on the
return of Mr. Barclay, who, being fully acquainted with all the
circumstances, will be enabled to give me that information, want of
which might lead me to do wrong on the one side or the other.

Information of the signature of the treaty with Morocco has been long
on its passage to you. I will beg leave to recur to dates, that you may
see that no part of it has been derived from me. The first notice I had
of it, was in a letter from Mr. Barclay, dated Daralbeyda, August the
11th. I received this on the 13th of September. No secure conveyance
offered till the 26th of the same month, being thirteen days after my
receipt of it. In my letter of that date, which went by the way of
London, I had the honor to enclose you a copy of Mr. Barclay's letter.
The conveyance of the treaty itself is suffering a delay here at
present, which all my anxiety cannot prevent. Colonel Franks' baggage,
which came by water from Cadiz to Rouen, has been long and hourly
expected. The moment it arrives, he will set out to London, to have
duplicates of the treaty signed by Mr. Adams, and from thence he will
proceed to New York.

The Chevalier del Pinto, who treated with us on behalf of Portugal,
being resident at London, I have presumed that causes of the delay of
that treaty had been made known to Mr. Adams, and by him communicated
to you. I will write to him by Colonel Franks, in order that you may be
answered on that subject.

The publication of the enclosed extract from my letter of May the 27th,
1786, will, I fear, have very mischievous effects. It will tend to draw
on the Count de Vergennes the formidable phalanx of the Farms; to
prevent his committing himself to me in any conversation which he does
not mean for the public papers; to inspire the same diffidence into all
other ministers, with whom I might have to transact business; to defeat
the little hope, if any hope existed, of getting rid of the Farm on the
article of tobacco; and to damp that freedom of communication which the
resolution of Congress of May the 3d, 1784, was intended to
re-establish.

Observing by the proceedings of Congress, that they are about to
establish a coinage, I think it my duty to inform them, that a Swiss,
of the name of Drost, established here, has invented a method of
striking the two faces and the edge of a coin, at one stroke. By this,
and other simplifications of the process of coinage, he is enabled to
coin from twenty-five thousand to thirty thousand pieces a day, with
the assistance of only two persons, the pieces of metal being first
prepared. I send you by Colonel Franks three coins of gold, silver and
copper, which you will perceive to be perfect medals; and I can assure
you, from having seen him coin many, that every piece is as perfect as
these. There has certainly never yet been seen any coin, in any
country, comparable to this. The best workmen in this way, acknowledge
that his is like a new art. Coin should always be made in the highest
perfection possible, because it is a great guard against the danger of
false coinage. This man would be willing to furnish his implements to
Congress, and if they please, he will go over and instruct a person to
carry on the work: nor do I believe he would ask anything unreasonable.
It would be very desirable, that in the institution of a new coinage,
we could set out on so perfect a plan as this, and the more so, as
while the work is so exquisitely done, it is done cheaper.

I will certainly do the best I can for the reformation of the consular
convention, being persuaded that our States would be very unwilling to
conform their laws either to the convention, or to the scheme. But it
is too difficult and too delicate, to form sanguine hopes. However,
that there may be room to reduce the convention, as much as
circumstances will admit, will it not be expedient for Congress to give
me powers, in which there shall be no reference to the scheme? The
powers sent me, oblige me to produce that scheme, and certainly, the
moment it is produced, they will not abate a tittle from it. If they
recollect the scheme, and insist on it, we can but conclude it; but if
they have forgotten it (which may be), and are willing to reconsider
the whole subject, perhaps we may get rid of something the more of it.
As the delay is not injurious to us, because the convention, whenever
and however made, is to put us in a worse state than we are in now, I
shall venture to defer saying a word on the subject, till I can hear
from you in answer to this. The full powers may be sufficiently
guarded, by private instructions to me, not to go beyond the former
scheme. This delay may be well enough ascribed (whenever I shall have
received new powers) to a journey I had before apprised the minister
that I should be obliged to take, to some mineral waters in the south
of France, to see if, by their aid, I may recover the use of my right
hand, of which a dislocation, about four months ago, threatens to
deprive me in a great measure. The surgeons have long insisted on this
measure. I shall return by Bordeaux, Nantes and L'Orient, to get the
necessary information for finishing our commercial regulations here.
Permit me, however, to ask as immediately as possible, an answer,
either affirmative or negative, as Congress shall think best, and to
ascribe the delay on which I venture, to my desire to do what is for
the best.

I send you a copy of the late marine regulations of this country. There
are things in it, which may become interesting to us. Particularly,
what relates to the establishment of a marine militia, and their
classification.

You will have seen in the public papers, that the King has called an
assembly of the Notables of this country. This has not been done for
one hundred and sixty years past. Of course, it calls up all the
attention of the people. The objects of this assembly are not named:
several are conjectured. The tolerating the Protestant religion;
removing all the internal Custom-houses to the frontier; equalizing the
gabelles on salt through the kingdom; the sale of the King's domains,
to raise money; or, finally, the effecting this necessary end by some
other means, are talked of. But in truth, nothing is known about it.
This government practises secrecy so systematically, that it never
publishes its purposes or its proceedings, sooner or more extensively
than necessary. I send you a pamphlet, which, giving an account of the
last Assembl√àe des Notables, may give an idea of what the present will
be.

A great desire prevails here of encouraging manufactures. The famous
Boulton and Watts, who are at the head of the plated manufactures of
Birmingham, the steam mills of London, copying presses and other
mechanical works, have been here. It is said also, that Wedgewood has
been here, who is famous for his steel manufactories, and an earthen
ware in the antique style; but as to this last person, I am not
certain. It cannot, I believe, be doubted, but that they came at the
request of government, and that they will be induced to establish
similar manufactures here.

The transferring hither those manufactures, which contribute so much to
draw our commerce to England, will have a great tendency to strengthen
our connections with this country, and loosen them with that.

The enfranchising the port of Honfleur at the mouth of the Seine, for
multiplying the connections with us, is at present an object. It meets
with opposition in the ministry; but I am in hopes it will prevail. If
natural causes operate, uninfluenced by accidental circumstances,
Bordeaux and Honfleur, or Havre, must ultimately take the greatest part
of our commerce. The former by the Garonne and canal of Languedoc,
opens the southern provinces to us; the latter, the northern ones and
Paris. Honfleur will be peculiarly advantageous for our rice and whale
oil, of which the principal consumption is at Paris. Being free, they
can be re-exported when the market here shall happen to be overstocked.

The labors of the ensuing summer will close the eastern half of the
harbor of Cherbourg, which will contain and protect forty sail of the
line. It has from fifty to thirty-five feet of water next to the cones,
shallowing gradually to the shore. Between this and Dunkirk, the
navigation of the channel will be rendered much safer in the event of a
war with England, and invasions on that country become more
practicable.

The gazettes of France and Leyden, to the present date, accompany this.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect respect,
Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO JOHN ADAMS.

PARIS, January 11, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--Mr. Jay, in his last letter to me, observes they hear
nothing further of the treaty with Portugal. I have taken the liberty
of telling him that I will write to you on the subject, and that he may
expect to hear from you on it, by the present conveyance. The Chevalier
del Pinto being at London, I presume he has, or can inform you why it
is delayed on their part. I will thank you also for the information he
shall give you.

There is here an order of priests called the Mathurins, the object of
whose institution is, the begging of alms for the redemption of
captives. About eighteen months ago, they redeemed three hundred, which
cost them about fifteen hundred livres apiece. They have agents
residing in the Barbary States, who are constantly employed in
searching and contracting for the captives of their nation, and they
redeem at a lower price than any other people can. It occurred to me,
that their agency might be engaged for our prisoners at Algiers. I have
had interviews with them, and the last night, a long one with the
General of the order. They offer their services with all the benignity
and cordiality possible. The General told me, he could not expect to
redeem our prisoners as cheap as their own, but that he would use all
the means in his power to do it on the best terms possible, which will
be the better, as there shall be the less suspicion that he acts for
our public. I told him I would write to you on the subject, and speak
to him again. What do you think of employing them, limiting them to a
certain price, as three hundred dollars for instance, or any other sum
you think proper? He will write immediately to his instruments there,
and in two or three months we can know the event. He will deliver them
at Marseilles, Cadiz, or where we please, at our expense. The money
remaining of the fund destined to the Barbary business, may, I suppose,
be drawn on for this object. Write me your opinion, if you please, on
this subject, finally, fully and immediately, that, if you approve the
proposition, I may enter into arrangements with the General, before my
departure to the waters of Aix, which will be about the beginning of
February.

I have the honor to be, with very sincere esteem and respect, dear Sir,
your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO COLONEL FRANKS.

January 11, 1787.


My anxiety, my dear Sir, on the detention of the Morocco treaty is
inexpressible. However cogent and necessary the motives which detain
you, I should be deemed inexcusable were I to let such a safe
opportunity as that by Colonel Blackden pass without sending the papers
on to London. Mr. Jay complained that a treaty signed in June was not
ratified in October. What will they say when they shall observe that
the same treaty does not reach them till March, nine months? In the
meantime, our whole commerce is paying a heavy tax for insurance till
its publication. Can you fix a day as early as Monday or Tuesday for
your departure, whether your baggage arrives or not, or would you
rather decline the going with the papers? In the former case, if your
baggage does not arrive before your departure, any orders you may think
proper to leave respecting it, shall be punctually executed. I can send
it to Mr. Simonson at Havre, so that it may go to America in the
February packet. I shall see you at the Marquis's to-day, and we will
speak about this matter.




TO MONSIEUR OTTO.

PARIS, January 14, 1787.


SIR,--I have been honored with your letter of October 15, and thank you
for the intelligence it contained. I am able to make you but an unequal
return for it, your friends here being so much more in condition to
communicate to you interesting intelligence. With respect to the
affairs of Holland, they do not promise arrangement. The interest which
the King of Prussia takes in the affairs of the Stadtholder, seem to
threaten an interruption of his cordiality with the country. The
misunderstanding between the Kings of Spain and Naples, and a projected
visit of the latter to Vienna, with the known influence of his Queen
over him, are matter for some jealousy.

As to domestic news, the Assembly of Notables occupies all
conversation. What will be the subjects of their deliberation is not
yet declared. The establishment of provincial assemblies, tolerating
the Protestant religion, removing the internal barriers to the
frontiers, equalizing the Gabelles, sale of the King's domains, and, in
short, every other possible reformation, are conjectured by different
persons. I send you a pamphlet on the last Assembly of Notables, from
which ideas are formed as to what this will be. Possibly you may
receive the same from some of your friends. I send you, also, what it
is less likely you should get from them, because it is next to
impossible to get it at all--that is, a late memoir by Linquet, which
has produced his perpetual exile from this country. To these I add a
report written by M. Bailly, on the subject of the Hotel-Dieu of Paris,
which has met a very general approbation. These are things for the day
only. I recollect no work of any dignity which has been lately
published. We shall very soon receive another volume on Mineralogy from
M. de Buffon; and a third volume of the "Cultivator Am√àricain" is in
the press. So is a History of the American War, by a Monsieur Soul√às,
the two first volumes of which, coming down to the capture of Burgoyne,
I have seen, and think better than any I have seen. Mazzei will print
soon two or three volumes 8vo. of "Recherches Historiques and
Politiques sur les Etats Unis d'Am√àrique," which are sensible. We are
flattered with the hopes that the packet boats will hereafter sail
monthly from Havre, the first being to sail on the 10th of the next
month. This is very desirable indeed, as it will furnish more frequent
opportunities of correspondence between the two countries. If I can be
made useful to you in any line whatever here, it will make me very
happy. Being with sincere esteem and respect, Sir, your most obedient,
and most humble servant.




TO MONSIEUR LE DUC D'HARCOURT, GOVERNEUR DU DAUPHIN.

PARIS, January 14, 1787.


SIR,--In the conversation with which you were pleased to honor me, a
few days ago, on the enfranchisement of the port of Honfleur, I took
the liberty of observing, that I was not instructed by my constituents
to make any proposition on that subject. That it would be agreeable to
them, however, I must suppose, because it will offer the following
advantages:

1. It is a convenient entrep√ôt for furnishing us with the manufactures
of the northern parts of France, and particularly of Paris, and for
receiving and distributing the productions of our country in exchange.

2. Cowes, on the opposite side of the channel, has heretofore been the
deposit for a considerable part of our productions, landed in Great
Britain in the first instance, but intended for re-exportation. From
thence, our rice, particularly, has been distributed to France and
other parts of Europe. I am not certain whether our tobaccos were
deposited there, or carried to London to be sorted for the different
markets. To draw this business from Cowes, no place is so favorably
situated as Honfleur.

3. It would be a convenient deposit for our whale oil, of which, after
the supply of Paris, there will be a surplus for re-exportation.

4. Should our fur trade be recovered out of the hands of the English,
it will naturally come to Honfleur, as the port of Paris.

5. Salt is an important article in all our return cargoes; because,
being carried as ballast, its freight costs nothing. But, on account of
some regulations, with which I am not well acquainted, it cannot, at
present, be shipped to advantage from any port on the Seine.

6. Our vessels being built sharp, for swift sailing, suffer extremely
in most of the western ports of France, in which they are left on dry
ground at every ebb of the tide. But at Honfleur, I am told, they can
ride in bold water, on a good bottom and near the shore at all times.

These facts may, perhaps, throw some light on the question in which,
for the good of both countries, you are pleased to interest yourself. I
take the liberty, therefore, of barely mentioning them, and with the
more pleasure, as it furnishes me an occasion of assuring you of those
sentiments of respect and esteem with which I have the honor to be,
your most obedient, humble servant.




TO MONSIEUR DE CREVE-COEUR.

PARIS, January 15, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I see by the Journal of this morning, that they are robbing
us of another of our inventions to give it to the English. The writer,
indeed, only admits them to have revived what he thinks was known to
the Greeks, that is, the making the circumference of a wheel of one
single piece. The farmers in New Jersey were the first who practised
it, and they practised it commonly. Dr. Franklin, in one of his trips
to London, mentioned this practice to the man now in London, who has
the patent for making those wheels. The idea struck him. The Doctor
promised to go to his shop, and assist him in trying to make the wheel
of one piece. The Jersey farmers do it by cutting a young sapling, and
bending it, while green and juicy, into a circle; and leaving it so
until it becomes perfectly seasoned. But in London there are no
saplings. The difficulty was, then, to give to old wood the pliancy of
young. The Doctor and the workman labored together some weeks, and
succeeded; and the man obtained a patent for it, which has made his
fortune. I was in his shop in London, he told me the whole story
himself, and acknowledged, not only the origin of the idea, but how
much the assistance of Dr. Franklin had contributed to perform the
operation on dry wood. He spoke of him with love and gratitude. I think
I have had a similar account from Dr. Franklin, but cannot be quite
certain. I know, that being in Philadelphia when the first set of
patent wheels arrived from London, and were spoken of by the gentleman
(an Englishman) who brought them, as a wonderful discovery, the idea of
its being a new discovery was laughed at by the Philadelphians, who, in
their Sunday parties across the Delaware, had seen every farmer's cart
mounted on such wheels. The writer in the paper, supposes the English
workman got his idea from Homer. But it is more likely the Jersey
farmer got his idea from thence, because ours are the only farmers who
can read Homer; because, too, the Jersey practice is precisely that
stated by Homer: the English practice very different. Homer's words are
(comparing a young hero killed by Ajax to a poplar felled by a workman)
literally thus: "He fell on the ground, like a poplar, which has grown
smooth, in the west part of a great meadow; with its branches shooting
from its summit. But the chariot maker, with the sharp axe, has felled
it, that he may bend a wheel for a beautiful chariot. It lies drying on
the banks of the river." Observe the circumstances which coincide with
the Jersey practice. 1. It is a tree growing in a moist place, full of
juices and easily bent. 2. It is cut while green. 3. It is bent into
the circumference of a wheel. 4. It is left to dry in that form. You,
who write French well and readily, should write a line for the Journal,
to reclaim the honor of our farmers. Adieu. Yours affectionately.




TO COLONEL EDWARD CARRINGTON.

PARIS, January 16, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--Uncertain whether you might be at New York at the moment of
Colonel Franks' arrival. I have enclosed my private letters for
Virginia under cover to our delegation in general, which otherwise I
would have taken the liberty to enclose particularly to you, as best
acquainted with the situation of the persons to whom they are
addressed. Should this find you at New York, I will still ask your
attention to them.

In my letter to Mr. Jay, I have mentioned the meeting of the Notables,
appointed for the 29th instant. It is now put off to the 7th or 8th of
next month. This event, which will hardly excite any attention in
America, is deemed here the most important one which has taken place in
their civil line during the present century. Some promise their country
great things from it, some nothing. Our friend de La Fayette was placed
on the list originally. Afterwards his name disappeared, but finally
was reinstated. This shows that his character here is not considered as
an indifferent one, and that it excites agitation. His education in our
school has drawn on him a very jealous eye from a court whose
principles are the most absolute despotism. But I hope he has nearly
passed his crisis. The King, who is a good man, is favorably disposed
towards him, and he is supported by powerful family connections and by
the public good will. He is the youngest man of the Notables except one
whose office placed him on the list.

The Count de Vergennes has within these ten days had a very severe
attack of what is deemed an unfixed gout. He has been well enough,
however, to do business to-day. But anxieties for him are not yet
quieted. He is a great and good minister, and an accident to him might
endanger the peace of Europe.

The tumults in America I expected would have produced in Europe an
unfavorable opinion of our political state. But it has not. On the
contrary, the small effect of these tumults seems to have given more
confidence in the firmness of our governments. The interposition of the
people themselves on the side of government has had a great effect on
the opinion here. I am persuaded myself that the good sense of the
people will always be found to be the best army. They may be led astray
for a moment, but will soon correct themselves. The people are the only
censors of their governors; and even their errors will tend to keep
these to the true principles of their institution. To punish these
errors too severely would be to suppress the only safeguard of the
public liberty. The way to prevent these irregular interpositions of
the people, is to give them full information of their affairs through
the channel of the public papers, and to contrive that those papers
should penetrate the whole mass of the people. The basis of our
governments being the opinion of the people, the very first object
should be to keep that right; and were it left to me to decide whether
we should have a government without newspapers, or newspapers without a
government, I should not hesitate a moment to prefer the latter. But I
should mean that every man should receive those papers, and be capable
of reading them. I am convinced that those societies (as the Indians)
which live without government, enjoy in their general mass an
infinitely greater degree of happiness than those who live under the
European governments. Among the former, public opinion is in the place
of law, and restrains morals as powerfully as laws ever did anywhere.
Among the latter, under pretence of governing, they have divided their
nations into two classes, wolves and sheep. I do not exaggerate. This
is a true picture of Europe. Cherish, therefore, the spirit of our
people, and keep alive their attention. Do not be too severe upon their
errors, but reclaim them by enlightening them. If once they become
inattentive to the public affairs, you and I, and Congress and
Assemblies, Judges and Governors, shall all become wolves. It seems to
be the law of our general nature, in spite of individual exceptions;
and experience declares that man is the only animal which devours his
own kind; for I can apply no milder term to the governments of Europe,
and to the general prey of the rich on the poor. The want of news has
led me into disquisition instead of narration, forgetting you have
every day enough of that. I shall be happy to hear from you sometimes,
only observing that whatever passes through the post is read, and that
when you write what should be read by myself only, you must be so good
as to confide your letter to some passenger, or officer of the packet.
I will ask your permission to write to you sometimes, and to assure you
of the esteem and respect with which I have honor to be, dear Sir, your
most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO M. DU RIVAL.

PARIS, January 17, 1787.


SIR,--You were pleased, in behalf of a friend, to ask information of me
on the subject of the money of the United States of America, and I had
the honor of informing you, by letter of November 7, that no
regulations of their coin had then been made by Congress, as far as I
knew. They had, however, entered into resolutions on that subject,
which have since come to hand. A translation of these will be found in
the Leyden Gazette of some few weeks ago. But it will be necessary to
make the following corrections in the Gazette:

The Gazette dates the resolutions October 10; but they were of August
8. It gives only 365.64 grains of pure silver to the dollar; it should
be 375.64. It states the pound of silver, with its alloy, to be worth
9.99 dollars only, whereas it is fixed at 13.777 dollars; and the pound
of gold, with its alloy, being worth 209.77 dollars, gives the
proportion of silver to gold as 1 to 15.225. These corrections being
made, the resolutions as stated in the Leyden Gazette may be confided
in.

I have the honor to be, with much respect, Sir, your most obedient, and
most humble servant.




TO MESSRS. S. AND J. H. DELAP.

PARIS, January 17, 1787.


GENTLEMEN,--I am honored this day by the receipt of your letter of the
6th instant. Having nothing to do with the matters of account of the
United States in Europe, it is out of my power to say anything to you
as to the payment of the balance due to you. Yet I think it would be
proper for you to write to the "Commissioners of the Treasury," at New
York, on this subject. They are the persons who are to pay it; and as
their Board has been created since the debt was contracted, they may
possibly need information on the subject.

As to your loan office certificates, you would do well to commit them
to some correspondent in America. They will be settled by the table of
depreciation at their true worth in gold or silver at the time the
paper dollars were lent. On that true value the interest has been paid,
and continues to be paid to the creditors annually in America. That the
principal will also be paid, is as sure as any future fact can be. The
epoch is not fixed. It is expected that the State of New York will
shortly accede to the impost which has been proposed. When that shall
be done, that impost will suffice to pay the interest, and sink the
principal in a very few years. I have the honor to be, with much
respect, Gentlemen, your most obedient humble servant.




TO M. SOUL‚Ä¶S.

PARIS, January 19, 1787.


SIR,--I have the honor of enclosing to you the sheets on the subject of
Wyoming. I have had a long conversation with M. Creve-coeur on them. He
knows well that canton. He was in the neighborhood of the place when it
was destroyed, saw great numbers of the fugitives, aided them with his
wagons, and had the story from all their mouths. He committed notes to
writing at the moment, which are now in Normandy, at his father's. He
has written for them, and they will be here in five or six days, when
he premises to put them into my hands. He says there will be a great
deal to alter in your narration, and that it must assume a different
face, more favorable both to the British and Indians. His veracity may
be relied on, and I told him I was sure your object was truth; and, to
render your work estimable by that character, that I thought you would
wait, and readily make any changes upon evidence which should be
satisfactory to you. The moment I receive his notes I will communicate
them to you, and have the honor to be, with much respect, Sir, your
most obedient humble servant.




TO M. HILLIARD D'AUBERTEUIL.

PARIS, January 27, 1787.


SIR,--I duly received the letter you did me the honor to write, and the
verses therein enclosed on the subject of M. de La Fayette. I have
taken measures to present the public with this acceptable present; but
the newspapers here are slow in complying with the applications
addressed to them. It is not for a stranger to decide on the merits of
poetry in a language foreign to him. Were I to presume to do it in this
instance, I should certainly assign to this composition a high degree
of approbation.

I wish it were in my power to furnish you with any materials for the
history on which you are engaged, but I brought no papers of that kind
with me from America. In a letter you did me the honor of writing me
sometime ago, you seemed to suppose, you might go to America in quest
of materials. Should you execute this idea, I should with great
pleasure give any assistance in my power to obtain access for you to
the several deposits of materials which are in that country. I have the
honor to be, with great respect, Sir, your most obedient, and most
humble servant.




TO CHEVALIER DE SEGOND.

PARIS, January 27, 1787.


SIR,--I have duly received the letter with which you have been pleased
to honor me, complaining of the non-payment of interest on the sum due
to you from the United States. I feel with great sensibility the weight
of these complaints; but it is neither in my province, nor in my power,
to remedy them. I am noways authorized to interfere with the money
matters of the United States in Europe. These rest altogether between
the Commissioners of the Treasury of the United States at New York and
their bankers in Europe. Being informed, however, from Mr. Grand, that
the funds appropriated to the payment of the foreign officers were
exhausted, I took the liberty of representing strongly to the
Commissioners the motives which should urge them to furnish new
supplies. They assured me, in answer, that they would do it at the
first moment it should be in their power. I am perfectly persuaded they
will; however, I shall immediately forward to them the letter you have
been pleased to address to me; and will observe to you, that it is to
them alone, or to Congress, to whom you can make any future
applications with effect.

I have the honor to be, with much respect, Sir, your most obedient, and
most humble servant.




TO JAMES MADISON.[2]

PARIS, January 30, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--My last to you was of the 16th of December; since which, I
have received yours of November the 25th, and December the 4th, which
afforded me, as your letters always do, a treat on matters public,
individual and economical. I am impatient to learn your sentiments on
the late troubles in the Eastern States. So far as I have yet seen,
they do not appear to threaten serious consequences. Those States have
suffered by the stoppage of the channels of their commerce, which have
not yet found other issues. This must render money scarce, and make the
people uneasy. This uneasiness has produced acts absolutely
unjustifiable; but I hope they will provoke no severities from their
governments. A consciousness of those in power that their
administration of the public affairs has been honest, may perhaps,
produce too great a degree of indignation; and those characters,
wherein fear predominates over hope, may apprehend too much from these
instances of irregularity. They may conclude too hastily, that nature
has formed man insusceptible of any other government than that of
force, a conclusion not founded in truth nor experience. Societies
exist under three forms, sufficiently distinguishable. 1. Without
government, as among our Indians. 2. Under governments, wherein the
will of every one has a just influence; as is the case in England, in a
slight degree, and in our States, in a great one. 3. Under governments
of force; as is the case in all other monarchies, and in most of the
other republics. To have an idea of the curse of existence under these
last, they must be seen. It is a government of wolves over sheep. It is
a problem, not clear in my mind, that the first condition is not the
best. But I believe it to be inconsistent with any great degree of
population. The second state has a great deal of good in it. The mass
of mankind under that, enjoys a precious degree of liberty and
happiness. It has its evils, too; the principal of which is the
turbulence to which it is subject. But weigh this against the
oppressions of monarchy, and it becomes nothing. _Malo periculosam
libertatem quam quietam servitutem._ Even this evil is productive of
good. It prevents the degeneracy of government, and nourishes a general
attention to the public affairs. I hold it, that a little rebellion,
now and then, is a good thing, and as necessary in the political world
as storms in the physical. Unsuccessful rebellions, indeed, generally
establish the encroachments on the rights of the people, which have
produced them. An observation of this truth should render honest
republican governors so mild in their punishment of rebellions, as not
to discourage them too much. It is a medicine necessary for the sound
health of government.

      [2] The latter part of this letter is in cypher; but appended to
      the copy preserved, are explanatory notes, which have enabled us
      to publish it entire, except a few words, to which they afford no
      key. These are either marked thus * * *, or the words which the
      context seemed to require, inserted in italics.

If these transactions give me no uneasiness, I feel very differently at
another piece of intelligence, to wit, the possibility that the
navigation of the Mississippi may be abandoned to Spain. I never had
any interest westward of the Alleghany; and I never will have any. But
I have had great opportunities of knowing the character of the people
who inhabit that country; and I will venture to say, that the act which
abandons the navigation of the Mississippi is an act of separation
between the eastern and western country. It is a relinquishment of five
parts out of eight, of the territory of the United States; an
abandonment of the fairest subject for the payment of our public debts,
and the chaining those debts on our own necks, _in perpetuum_. I have
the utmost confidence in the honest intentions of those who concur in
this measure; but I lament their want of acquaintance with the
character and physical advantages of the people, who, right or wrong,
will suppose their interest sacrificed on this occasion, to the
contrary interests of that part of the confederacy in possession of
present power. If they declare themselves a separate people, we are
incapable of a single effort to retain them. Our citizens can never be
induced, either as militia or as soldiers, to go there to cut the
throats of their own brothers and sons, or rather, to be themselves the
subjects, instead of the perpetrators of the parricide. Nor would that
country quit the cost of being retained against the will of its
inhabitants, could it be done. But it cannot be done. They are able
already to rescue the navigation of the Mississippi out of the hands of
Spain, and to add New Orleans to their own territory. They will be
joined by the inhabitants of Louisiana. This will bring on a war
between them and Spain; and that will produce the question with us,
whether it will not be worth our while to become parties with them in
the war, in order to re-unite them with us, and thus correct our error?
And were I to permit my forebodings to go one step further, I should
predict that the inhabitants of the United States would force their
rulers to take the affirmative of that question. I wish I may be
mistaken in all these opinions.

We have, for some time, expected that the Chevalier de La Luzerne would
obtain a promotion in the diplomatic line, by being appointed to some
of the courts where this country keeps an ambassador. But none of the
vacancies taking place, which had been counted on, I think the present
disposition is, to require his return to his station in America. He
told me himself, lately, that he should return in the spring. I have
never pressed this matter on the court, though I knew it to be
desirable and desired on our part; because, if the compulsion on him to
return had been the work of Congress, he would have returned in such
ill temper with them, as to disappoint them in the good they expected
from it. He would forever have laid at their door his failure of
promotion. I did not press it for another reason, which is, that I have
great reason to believe that the character of the Count de Moutier, who
would go, were the Chevalier to be otherwise provided for, would give
the most perfect satisfaction in America.

As you have now returned into Congress, it will become of importance
that you should form a just estimate of certain public characters: on
which, therefore, I will give you such notes, as my knowledge of them
has furnished me with. You will compare them with the materials you are
otherwise possessed of, and decide on a view of the whole.

You know the opinion I formerly entertained of my friend, Mr. Adams.
 * * * and the Governor were the first who shook that opinion. I
afterwards saw proofs which convicted him of a degree of vanity, and of
a blindness to it, of which no germ appeared in Congress. A seven
months' intimacy with him here, and as many weeks in London, have given
me opportunities of studying him closely. He is vain, irritable, and a
bad calculator of the force and probable effect of the motives which
govern men. This is all the ill which can possibly be said of him. He
is as disinterested as the being who made him: he is profound in his
views; and accurate in his judgment, except where knowledge of the
world is necessary to form a judgment. He is so amiable, that I
pronounce you will love him, if ever you become acquainted with him. He
would be, as he was, a great man in Congress.

Mr. Carmichael is, I think, very little known in America. I never saw
him, and while I was in Congress I formed rather a disadvantageous idea
of him. His letters, received then, showed him vain, and more attentive
to ceremony and etiquette, than we suppose men of sense should be. I
have now a constant correspondence with him, and find him a little
hypochondriac and discontented. He possesses a very good understanding,
though not of the first order. I have had great opportunities of
searching into his character, and have availed myself of them. Many
persons of different nations, coming from Madrid to Paris, all speak of
him as in high esteem, and I think it certain that he has more of the
Count de Florida Blanca's friendship, than any diplomatic character at
that court. As long as this minister is in office, Carmichael can do
more than any other person who could be sent there.

You will see Franks, and doubtless he will be asking some appointment.
I wish there may be any one for which he is fit. He is light,
indiscreet, active, honest, affectionate. Though Bingham is not in
diplomatic office, yet as he wishes to be so, I will mention such
circumstances of him, as you might otherwise be deceived in. He will
make you believe he was on the most intimate footing with the first
characters in Europe, and versed in the secrets of every cabinet. Not a
word of this is true. He had a rage for being presented to great men,
and had no * * * in the methods by which he could effect it. * * * * *

The Marquis de La Fayette is a most valuable auxiliary to me. His zeal
is unbounded, and his weight with those in power, great. His education
having been merely military, commerce was an unknown field to him. But
his good sense enabling him to comprehend perfectly whatever is
explained to him, his agency has been very efficacious. He has a great
deal of sound genius, is well remarked by the King, and rising in
popularity. He has nothing against him, but the suspicion of republican
principles. I think he will one day be of the ministry. His foible is,
a canine appetite for popularity and fame; but he will get above this.
_The Count de Vergennes_ is _ill_. The possibility of his _recovery_,
renders it dangerous for us to express a doubt of it; but he is in
danger. He is a great minister in European affairs, but has very
imperfect ideas of our _institutions_, and no confidence in them. His
devotion to the principles of pure despotism, renders him
unaffectionate to our governments. But his fear of England makes him
value us as a make weight. He is cool, reserved in political
conversations, but free and familiar on other subjects, and a very
attentive, agreeable person to do business with. It is impossible to
have a clearer, better organized head; but age has chilled his heart.

Nothing should be spared, on our part, to attach this country to us. It
is the only one on which we can rely for support, under every event.
Its inhabitants love us more, I think, than they do any other nation on
earth. This is very much the effect of the good dispositions with which
the French officers returned. In a former letter, I mentioned to you
the dislocation of my wrist. I can make not the least use of it, except
for the single article of writing, though it is going on five months
since the accident happened. I have great anxieties, lest I should
never recover any considerable use of it. I shall, by the advice of my
surgeons, set out in a fortnight for the waters of Aix, in Provence. I
chose these out of several they proposed to me, because if they fail to
be effectual, my journey will not be useless altogether. It will give
me an opportunity of examining the canal of Languedoc, and of acquiring
knowledge of that species of navigation, which may be useful hereafter;
but more immediately, it will enable me to make the tour of the ports
concerned in commerce with us, to examine, on the spot, the defects of
the late regulations respecting our commerce, to learn the further
improvements which may be made in it, and on my return, to get this
business finished. I shall be absent between two and three months,
unless anything happens to recall me here sooner, which may always be
effected in ten days, in whatever part of my route I may be.

In speaking of characters, I omitted those of Reyneval and Hennin, the
two eyes of Count de Vergennes. The former is the most important
character, because possessing the most of the confidence of the Count.
He is rather cunning than wise, his views of things being neither great
nor liberal. He governs himself by principles which he has learned by
rote, and is fit only for the details of execution. His heart is
susceptible of little passions, but not of good ones. He is
brother-in-law to M. Gerard, from whom he received disadvantageous
impressions of us, which cannot be effaced. He has much duplicity.
Hennin is a philosopher, sincere, friendly, liberal, learned, beloved
by everybody; the other by nobody. I think it a great misfortune that
the United States are in the department of the former. As particulars
of this kind may be useful to you, in your present situation, I may
hereafter continue the chapter. I know it will be safely lodged in your
discretion.

Feb. 5. Since writing thus far, Franks has returned from England. I
learn that Mr. Adams desires to be recalled, and that Smith should be
appointed Charg√à des Affaires there. It is not for me to decide whether
any diplomatic character should be kept at a court, which keeps none
with us. You can judge of Smith's abilities by his letters. They are
not of the first order, but they are good. For his honesty, he is like
our friend Monroe; turn his soul wrong side outwards, and there is not
a speck on it. He has one foible, an excessive inflammability of
temper, but he feels it when it comes on, and has resolution enough to
suppress it, and to remain silent till it passes over.

I send you, by Colonel Franks, your pocket telescope, walking stick and
chemical box. The two former could not be combined together. The latter
could not be had in the form you referred to. Having a great desire to
have a portable copying machine, and being satisfied, from some
experiments, that the principle of the large machine might be applied
in a small one, I planned one when in England, and had it made. It
answers perfectly. I have since set a workman to making them here, and
they are in such demand that he has his hands full. Being assured that
you will be pleased to have one, when you shall have tried its
convenience, I send you one by Colonel Franks. The machine costs
ninety-six livres, the appendages twenty-four livres, and I send you
paper and ink for twelve livres; in all, one hundred and thirty-two
livres. There is a printed paper of directions; but you must expect to
make many essays before you succeed perfectly. A soft brush, like a
shaving brush, is more convenient than the sponge. You can get as much
ink and paper as you please from London. The paper costs a guinea a
ream. I am, dear Sir, with sincere esteem and affection, your most
obedient humble servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

PARIS, February 1, 1787.


SIR,--My last letters were of the 31st of December, and 9th of January;
since which last date, I have been honored with yours of December the
13th and 14th. I shall pay immediate attention to your instructions
relative to the South Carolina frigate. I had the honor of informing
you of an improvement in the art of coining, made here by one Drost,
and of sending you, by Colonel Franks, a specimen of his execution in
gold and silver. I expected to have sent also a coin of copper. The
enclosed note from Drost will explain the reason why this was not sent.
It will let you see also, that he may be employed; as I suppose he is
not so certain as he was of being engaged here. Mr. Grand, who knows
him, gives me reason to believe he may be engaged reasonably. Congress
will decide whether it be worth their attention.

In some of my former letters, I suggested an opportunity of obliging
this court, by borrowing as much money in Holland as would pay the debt
due here, if such a loan could be obtained; as to which, I was
altogether ignorant. To save time, I wrote to Mr. Dumas, to know
whether he thought it probable a loan could be obtained, enjoining on
him the strictest secrecy, and informing him I was making the inquiry
merely of my own motion, and without instruction. I enclose you his
answer. He thinks purchasers of the debt could be found, with a
sacrifice of a small part of the capital, and a postponement be
obtained of some of the first reimbursements. The proposition by him,
for an immediate adoption of this measure by me, was probably urged on
his mind by a desire to serve our country, more than a strict attention
to my duty, and the magnitude of the object. I hope, on the contrary,
that if it should be thought worth a trial, it may be put into the
hands of Mr. Adams, who knows the ground, and is known there, and whose
former successful negotiations in this line, would give better-founded
hopes of success on this occasion.

I formerly mentioned to you the hopes of preferment, entertained by the
Chevalier de La Luzerne. They have been baffled by events; none of the
vacancies taking place which had been expected. Had I pressed his being
ordered back, I have reason to believe the order would have been given.
But he would have gone back in ill humor with Congress, he would have
laid forever at their door the failure of a promotion then viewed as
certain; and this might have excited dispositions that would have
disappointed us of the good we hoped from his return. The line I have
observed with him has been, to make him sensible that nothing was more
desired by Congress than his return, but that they would not willingly
press it, so as to defeat him of a personal advantage. He sees his
prospects fail, and will return in the approaching spring, unless
something unexpected should turn up in his favor. In this case, the
Count de Moutier has the promise of succeeding to him, and, if I do not
mistake his character, he would give great satisfaction. So that I
think you may calculate on seeing one or the other, by midsummer.

It had been suspected that France and England might adopt those
concerted regulations of commerce for their West Indies, of which your
letter expresses some apprehensions. But the expressions in the 4th,
5th, 7th, 11th, 18th, and other articles of their treaty, which
communicate to the English the privileges of the most favored
_European_ nation only, has lessened, if not removed those fears. They
have clearly reserved a right of favoring, specially, any nation not
European; and there is no nation out of Europe, who could so probably
have been in their eye at that time, as ours. They are wise. They must
see it probable, at least, that any concert with England, will be but
of short duration; and they could hardly propose to sacrifice for that,
a connection with us, which may be perpetual.

We have been for some days in much inquietude for the Count de
Vergennes. He is very seriously ill. Nature seems struggling to decide
his disease into a gout. A swelled foot, at present, gives us a hope of
this issue. His loss would at all times have been great; but it would
be immense during the critical poise of European affairs existing at
this moment. I enclose you a letter from one of the foreign officers,
complaining of the non-payment of their interest. It is only one out of
many I have received. This is accompanied by a second copy of the
Moorish declaration sent me by Mr. Barclay. He went to Alicant to
settle with Mr. Lambe; but on his arrival there, found he was gone to
Minorca. A copy of his letter will inform you of this circumstance, and
of some others relative to Algiers, with his opinion on them. Whatever
the States may enable Congress to do for obtaining the peace of that
country, it is a separate question whether they will redeem our
captives, how, and at what price. If they decide to redeem them, I will
beg leave to observe, that it is of great importance that the first
redemption be made at as low a price as possible, because it will form
the future tariff. If these pirates find that they can have a very
great price for Americans, they will abandon proportionably their
pursuits against other nations, to direct them towards ours. That the
choice of Congress may be enlarged, as to the instruments they may use
for effecting the redemption, I think it my duty to inform them, that
there is here an order of priests called the Mathurins, the object of
whose institution is to beg alms for the redemption of captives. They
keep members always in Barbary, searching out the captives of their
country, and redeem, I believe, on better terms than any other body,
public or private. It occurred to me, that their agency might be
obtained for the redemption of our prisoners at Algiers. I obtained
conference with the General, and with some members of the order. The
General, with all the benevolence and cordiality possible, undertook to
act for us, if we should desire it. He told me that their last
considerable redemption was of about three hundred prisoners, who cost
them somewhat upwards of fifteen hundred livres apiece; but that they
should not be able to redeem ours as cheap as they do their own; and
that it must be absolutely unknown that the public concern themselves
in the operation, or the price would be greatly enhanced. The
difference of religion was not once mentioned, nor did it appear to me
to be thought of. It was a silent reclamation and acknowledgment of
fraternity, between two religions of the same family, which historical
events of ancient date had rendered more hostile to one another, than
to their common adversaries. I informed the General, that I should
communicate the good dispositions of his order to those who alone had
the authority to decide whatever related to our captives. Mr.
Carmichael informs me, that moneys have been advanced for the support
of our prisoners at Algiers, which ought to be replaced. I infer from
the context of his letter, that these advances have been made by the
court of Madrid. I submit the information to Congress.

A treaty of commerce is certainly concluded between France and Russia.
The particulars of it are yet secret.

I enclose the gazettes of France and Leyden to this time, and have the
honor of assuring you of those sentiments of perfect esteem and respect
with which I am, Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO M. SOUL‚Ä¶S.

February 2, 1787.


SIR,--I send you the papers M. de Creve-coeur sent to Normandy for. The
account of the destruction of Wyoming begins page 40. You may rely
certainly on the author's facts, and you will be easily able to
separate from them his reflections. You can best judge whether an
account of that interesting settlement, condensed into a few lines,
might not form an agreeable episode in your history, and prepare the
mind more awfully for its final catastrophe. I will thank you to return
these papers as soon as you are done with them, that I may restore them
to the hands of M. de Creve-coeur before my departure, which will now
be in a few days. I have the honor to be, Sir, your most obedient
humble servant.




TO HIS EXCELLENCY MR. ADAMS.

PARIS, February 6, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--Your favors by Colonel Franks have come safely to hand. He
will set out from thence the 8th instant. The packet being to sail from
Havre the 10th, I enclose you the copy of a letter lately received from
Mr. Barclay, and of the paper it enclosed. In a letter from Mr.
Carmichael, is a postscript, dated December 25, in the following words:
"Since writing the preceding, the Portuguese Ambassador has pressed me
to hint, that the present moment is favorable to push our treaty with
the court." In the body of the letter he says: "The Count de Expilly
has promised me to continue his attention to our prisoners during his
stay at Algiers; and I have also engaged the Consul of Spain, who
remains there on his return, to take care of them. Advances have been
made for their support which ought to be refunded." I suppose these
advances have been made by order of Mr. Lambe, and that his powers
being at an end, it will be incumbent on us to take measures on that
subject. The Count de Vergennes is extremely ill. His disease is gouty.
We have for some days had hopes it would fix itself decidedly in the
foot. It shows itself there at times, as also in the shoulder, the
stomach, &c. Monsieur de Calonne is likewise ill, but his complaints
are of a rheumatic kind, which he has often had before. The illness of
these two ministers occasioned the postponement of the Assembly of the
Notables to the 14th, and probably will yet postpone it. Nothing is yet
known of the objects of that meeting. I send you a pamphlet giving a
summary account of all the meetings of a general nature which have
taken place heretofore. The treaty between Prussia and this country is
certainly concluded, but its contents are not yet known. I shall set
out for the waters of Aix on the 13th instant, so that I am unable to
say when and whence I shall have the honor of addressing you again. But
I take measures for the conveying to me on my road all letters, so that
should anything extraordinary require it, I can at all times be
recalled to Paris in a fortnight. I shall hope to hear from you at
times, as if I were in Paris. I thank you much for the valuable present
of your book. The subject of it is interesting, and I am sure it is
well treated. I shall take it on my journey, that I may have time to
study it. You told me once, you had thought of writing on hereditary
aristocracy. I wish you would carry it into execution. It would make a
proper sequel to the present work. I wish you all possible happiness,
and have the honor to be, with sentiments of sincere esteem and
affection, dear Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MRS. BINGHAM.

PARIS, February 7, 1787.


I know, Madam, that the twelve month is not yet expired; but it will
be, nearly, before this will have the honor of being put into your
hands. You are then engaged to tell me, truly and honestly, whether you
do not find the tranquil pleasures of America, preferable to the empty
bustle of Paris. For, to what does that bustle tend? At eleven o'clock,
it is day, _chez madame_. The curtains are drawn. Propped on bolsters
and pillows, and her head scratched into a little order, the bulletins
of the sick are read, and the billets of the well. She writes to some
of her acquaintance, and receives the visits of others. If the morning
is not very thronged, she is able to get out and hobble round the cage
of the Palais Royal; but she must hobble quickly, for the _coiffeur's_
turn is come; and a tremendous turn it is! Happy, if he does not make
her arrive when dinner is half over! The torpitude of digestion a
little passed, she flutters half an hour through the streets, by way of
paying visits, and then to the spectacles. These finished, another half
hour is devoted to dodging in and out of the doors of her very sincere
friends, and away to supper. After supper, cards; and after cards, bed;
to rise at noon the next day, and to tread, like a mill horse, the same
trodden circle over again. Thus the days of life are consumed, one by
one, without an object beyond the present moment; ever flying from the
ennui of that, yet carrying it with us; eternally in pursuit of
happiness, which keeps eternally before us. If death or bankruptcy
happen to trip us out of the circle, it is matter for the buzz of the
evening, and is completely forgotten by the next morning. In America,
on the other hand, the society of your husband, the fond cares for the
children, the arrangements of the house, the improvements of the
grounds, fill every moment with a healthy and an useful activity. Every
exertion is encouraging, because, to present amusement, it joins the
promise of some future good. The intervals of leisure are filled by the
society of real friends, whose affections are not thinned to cob-web,
by being spread over a thousand objects. This is the picture, in the
light it is presented to my mind; now let me have it in yours. If we do
not concur this year, we shall the next; or if not then, in a year or
two more. You see I am determined not to suppose myself mistaken.

To let you see that Paris is not changed in its pursuits, since it was
honored with your presence, I send you its monthly history. But this
relating only to the embellishments of their persons, I must add, that
those of the city go on well also. A new bridge, for example, is begun
at the Place Louis Quinze; the old ones are clearing off the rubbish
which encumbered them in the form of houses; new hospitals erecting;
magnificent walls of inclosure, and Custom-houses at their entrances,
&c., &c., &c. I know of no interesting change among those whom you
honored with your acquaintance, unless Monsieur de Saint James was of
that number. His bankruptcy, and taking asylum in the Bastile, have
furnished matter of astonishment. His garden, at the Pont de Neuilly,
where, on seventeen acres of ground, he had laid out fifty thousand
louis, will probably sell for somewhat less money. The workmen of Paris
are making rapid strides towards English perfection. Would you believe,
that in the course of the last two years, they have learned even to
surpass their London rivals in some articles? Commission me to have you
a phaeton made, and, if it is not as much handsomer than a London one,
as that is than a _Fiacre_, send it back to me. Shall I fill the box
with caps, bonnets, &c.? Not of my own choosing, but--I was going to
say, of Mademoiselle Bertin's, forgetting, for the moment, that she too
is a bankrupt. They shall be chosen then by whom you please; or, if you
are altogether nonplused by her eclipse, we will call an _Assembl√àe des
Notables_ to help you out of the difficulty, as is now the fashion. In
short, honor me with your commands of any kind, and they shall be
faithfully executed. The packets now established from Havre to New
York, furnish good opportunities of sending whatever you wish.

I shall end where I began, like a Paris day, reminding you of your
engagement to write me a letter of respectable length, an engagement
the more precious to me, as it has furnished the occasion, after
presenting my respects to Mr. Bingham, of assuring you of the sincerity
of those sentiments of esteem and respect with which I have the honor
to be, dear Madam, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO GOVERNOR RANDOLPH.

PARIS, February 7, 1787.


SIR,--I have the honor of enclosing to your Excellency, a report of the
proceedings on the inauguration of the bust of the Marquis de La
Fayette in this city. This has been attended with a considerable, but a
necessary delay. The principle that the King is the sole fountain of
honor in this country opposed a barrier to our desires, which
threatened to be insurmountable. No instance of a similar proposition
from a foreign power, had occurred in their history. The admitting it
in this case, is a singular proof of the King's friendly disposition
towards the States of America, and of his personal esteem for the
Marquis de La Fayette.

I take this, the earliest occasion, of congratulating my country on
your Excellency's appointment to the chair of government, and of
assuring you with great sincerity, of those sentiments of perfect
esteem and respect, with which I have the honor to be, your
Excellency's most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

PARIS, February 8, 1787.


SIR,--The packet being to sail the day after tomorrow, I have awaited
the last possible moment of writing by her, in hopes I might be able to
announce some favorable change in the situation of the Count de
Vergennes. But none has occurred, and in the meantime he has become
weaker by the continuance of his illness. Though not desperately ill,
he is dangerously so. The Comptroller General, M. de Calonnes, has been
very ill also, but he is getting well. These circumstances have
occasioned the postponement of the Assembl√àe des Notables to the 14th
instant, and will probably occasion a further postponement. As I shall
set out this day sennight for the waters of Aix, you will probably hear
the issue of the Count de Vergennes' illness through some other
channel, before I shall have the honor of addressing you again. I may
observe the same, as to the final decision for the _effranchisement_ of
Honfleur, which is in a fair way of being speedily concluded. The
exertions of Monsieur de Creve-coeur, and particularly his influence
with the Duke d'Harcourt, the principal instrument in effecting it,
have been of chief consequence in this matter.

I have the honor to be, with the most perfect esteem and respect, Sir,
your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MR. DUMAS.

PARIS, February 9, 1787.


SIR,--My last to you was dated December 25th; since which I have been
honored with your several favors of December the 29th, January the 5th,
9th and 23d. I thought that your affairs could not be more interesting
than they have been for a considerable time. Yet in the present moment
they are become more so, by the apparent withdrawing of so considerable
a personage in the drama, as the King of Prussia. To increase this
interest, another person, whose importance scarcely admits calculation,
is in a situation which fills us with alarm. Nature is struggling to
relieve him by a decided gout; she has my sincere prayers to aid her,
as I am persuaded she has yours. I have letters and papers from
America, as late as the 15th of December. The government of
Massachusetts had imprisoned three of the leaders of their insurgents.
The insurgents, being collected to the number of three or four hundred,
had sent in their petition to the government, praying another act of
pardon for their leaders and themselves, and, on this condition,
offering to go every man home, and conduct himself dutifully
afterwards. This is the latest intelligence.

I thank you for your attention to the question I had taken the liberty
of proposing to you. I think with you, that it would be advisable to
have our debt transferred to individuals of your country. There could,
and would be no objection to the guarantee remaining as you propose;
and a postponement of the first payments of capital, would surely be a
convenience to us. For though the resources of the United States are
great and growing, and their dispositions good, yet their machine is
new, and they have not got it to go well. It is the object of their
general wish at present, and they are all in movement, to set it in a
good train; but their movements are necessarily slow. They will surely
effect it in the end, because all have the same end in view; the
difficulty being only to get all the thirteen States to agree on the
same means. Divesting myself of every partiality, and speaking from
that thorough knowledge which I have of the country, their resources
and their principles, I had rather trust money in their hands, than in
that of any government on earth; because, though for awhile the
payments of the interest might be less regular, yet the final
reimbursement of the capital would be more sure.

I set out next week for the south of France, to try whether some
mineral waters in that quarter, much recommended, will restore the use
of my hand. I shall be absent from Paris two or three months; but I
take arrangements for the regular receipt of your favors, as if I were
here. It will be better, however, for you to put your letters to Mr.
Jay, under cover to Mr. Short, who remains here, and will forward them.

I have thought it my duty to submit to Congress the proposition about
the French debt, and may expect their answer in four months.

I have the honor to be, with sincere esteem and respect, Sir, your most
obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MESSRS. BORGNIS DESBORDES FR¬ªRES.

PARIS, February 12, 1787.


GENTLEMEN,--Mr. Barclay, the American Consul General for France, being
at present out of the kingdom, I have given orders to Mr. Grand, banker
at Paris, to pay your draught for one hundred and eighty-six livres,
advanced by you for the relief of the shipwrecked Americans. I thank
you for your attention to these unfortunate people. It will rest with
Mr. Barclay to give such future directions as he shall think proper for
cases of this kind, which properly fall within the consular department.
A certainty that your kindness will meet his thanks, and that my
interference in his absence will be approved, has engaged me to do it
without any hesitation. I am just setting out on a journey of two or
three months, but Mr. Grand, as I have before mentioned, will pay your
draught for the 168 livres whenever you shall be pleased to make it. I
have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem and
respect, Gentlemen, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO HIS EXCELLENCY MR. ADAMS.

PARIS, February 14, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--As I propose to write you on business by Mr. Cairnes, who
will set out in a few days for London, the object of the present letter
is only to inform you that the Count de Vergennes died yesterday
morning, and that the Count de Montmorin is appointed his successor,
and further to beg the favor of you to forward the enclosed by the
first vessel from London. I set out on my journey on Sunday the 18th. I
have the honor to be, with sentiments of very sincere affection and
respect, dear Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

PARIS, February 14, 1787.


SIR,--In the letter of the 8th instant, which I had the honor of
writing you, I informed you that the Count de Vergennes was dangerously
ill. He died yesterday morning, and the Count de Montmorin is appointed
his successor. Your personal knowledge of this gentleman, renders it
unnecessary for me to say anything of him.

Mr. Morris, during his office, being authorized to have the medals and
swords executed, which had been ordered by Congress, he authorized
Colonel Humphreys to take measures here for the execution. Colonel
Humphreys did so; and the swords were finished in time for him to carry
them. The medals not being finished, he desired me to attend to them.
The workman who was to make that of General Greene, brought me
yesterday, the medal in gold, twenty-three in copper, and the dye. Mr.
Short, during my absence, will avail himself of the first occasion
which shall offer, of forwarding the medals to you. I must beg leave,
through you, to ask the pleasure of Congress as to the number they
would choose to have struck. Perhaps they might be willing to deposit
one of each person, in every college of the United States. Perhaps they
might choose to give a series of them, to each of the crowned heads of
Europe, which would be an acceptable present to them. They will be
pleased to decide. In the meantime, I have sealed up the dye, and shall
retain it till I am honored with their orders as to this medal, and the
others also, when they shall be finished.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem and
respect, Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO M. LE PREV‚ÄòT DES MARCHANDS ET ECHEVINS DE PARIS.

PARIS, February 18, 1787.


SIR,--I am now to acknowledge the receipt of the letter with which you
have been pleased to honor me, together with the report on the
inauguration of the bust of the Major General the Marquis de La
Fayette. I availed myself of an opportunity which offered in the
moment, of transmitting them to the State of Virginia, with a faithful
representation of the favor with which the Prev√ôt des Marchands et
Echevins de Paris received their proposition, the zeal with which it
was pursued, and the dignity of its ultimate execution. Knowing the
attachment of my country to the character which was the subject of that
transaction, and the price they will set on the attentions of the
magistracy of Paris, I am safe in assuring you that they will feel
themselves infinitely obliged on this occasion.

The interest you are pleased to take in the happiness of our infant
States, your judicious admonitions as to the means of preserving it,
and the terms in which you particularly honor some of their members,
require my personal thanks, which I humbly offer, with all those
sentiments of homage and respect with which I have the honor to be,
Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MR. CARMICHAEL.

PARIS, February 18, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--My last to you was dated December 26, since which I have
been honored with yours of December 17. I now enclose you a duplicate
of the vote for the recall of Mr. Lambe. I take the liberty, also, of
putting under cover to you our confirmation of the Morocco treaty,
together with a joint letter to Fennish. The fear that Mr. Barclay
might not be at Madrid has occasioned my giving you this trouble, as
well as that of addressing the letter properly, and of having it
transmitted.

I have received from Mr. Jay sundry despatches relative to the frigate
the South Carolina, and to a claim against the Court of Madrid founded
on the aid of that vessel in taking the Bahama and Providence islands,
with an instruction from Congress to confer with the Prince of
Luxembourg, and get him to interest the Duke de La Vauguyon to join you
in your solicitations of this matter. This is accordingly done, and you
will have the aid of the Duke. The despatches relative to this subject,
I have sealed up and addressed to you, but they will be delivered to
the Duke de La Vauguyon, to find a safe occasion of forwarding them. My
last news from America was of the 15th of December. The insurgents of
Massachusetts had sent in a petition to their government, praying the
release of their leaders in jail, and an act of pardon for themselves,
and offering thereon to retire every man to his home and to live
submissively. You will have heard of the death of the Count de
Vergennes, and appointment of Mons. de Montmorin. I was unlucky enough
five months ago to dislocate my right wrist, and though well set, I
have as yet no use of it, except that I can write, but in pain. I am
advised to try the use of mineral waters, and those of Aix in Provence
being as much recommended as any others, I combine with this object a
design of making the tour of those seaports with which we trade,
Marseilles, Bordeaux, Nantes, &c, and shall set out the day after
to-morrow, and expect to be absent three months. This may probably
prevent my having the honor of writing to you during that interval,
unless anything extraordinary should arise. I take measures for the
receipt of all letters addressed to me as regularly as were I here. I
have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem and
respect, Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MR. BARCLAY.

PARIS, February 18, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I am now to acknowledge your separate favors of December
4th, and January 6th, and the joint one to Mr. Adams and myself of
January 6th; this last has been communicated to Congress, and to Mr.
Adams. You have my full and hearty approbation of the treaty you
obtained from Morocco, which is better and on better terms than I
expected. Mr. Adams and myself have annexed our confirmation to two of
the copies, one of which is gone to Congress; the other, with a joint
letter to Fennish, I now enclose to Mr. Carmichael, apprehending you
are not in Madrid. I concur clearly with you in opinion that, for many
reasons, Mr. Carmichael would be a proper person to negotiate our
business with Algiers, if it be negotiable with such means as we
possess. I have expressed, this opinion in my letters to America, but I
am sure we cannot raise the money necessary. Colonel Franks was gone to
London before I received your letter. He returned and embarked in the
packet for Havre, but nothing was done on the subject of accounts or
money. I was unlucky enough to dislocate my right wrist five months
ago, and though it was well set, I can yet make no use of it but to
write. I am advised to try mineral waters, and those of Aix in
Provence, being as much recommended as any others, I am induced to go
to them by the desire of making the tour of the ports with which we
trade, Marseilles, Bordeaux, Nantes, &c. I set out in two days and
shall be absent three months. The packets are finally fixed at Havre.
They sail every six weeks. Honfleur will, I think, certainly be made a
free port; and I flatter myself will become the centre for much of our
trade, and particularly that of rice. The death of Count de Vergennes,
and appointment of Monsieur de Montmorin, will reach you before this
letter does. I have letters, &c., from America as late as the 15th of
December. The insurgents of Massachusetts had prayed pardon for
themselves and their leaders in jail, and on these terms had offered to
retire and live peaceably at home. Mrs. Barclay and your family are
well, except they are somewhat apprehensive of a film growing over the
eye of your youngest daughter; but should it do so, it will be easily
removed. I have the honor to be, with much esteem and respect, dear
Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO HIS EXCELLENCY JOHN ADAMS.

PARIS, February 20, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I am now to acknowledge the receipt of your favor of January
25th. Colonel Franks sailed in the packet of this month from Havre for
New York. The arrangement of the packets opens a direct communication
between Paris and America, and if we succeed, as I expect we will, in
getting Honfleur made a free port, I hope to see that place become the
deposit for our whale oil, rice, tobacco and furs, and that, from
thence, what is not wanted in the country may be distributed to others.
You remember giving me a letter of credit on Messrs. Willinck and
Staphorst for one thousand guineas to pay for the swords and medals.
When the swords were finished, I drew on the Vandemjers, with whom the
money was deposited, for sixty-five thousand livres, to pay for the
swords. They paid it. A medal is now finished, and others will very
soon be. But these gentlemen say they must have fresh orders. In the
meantime, the workmen complain. Will you be so good as to draw in favor
of Mr. Grand on Willinck, &c, for the balance of the thousand guineas
(which is about the sum that will be necessary), and send the bill to
Mr. Grand, who, in my absence, will negotiate it and pay the workmen. I
enclose you Vandemjers' answer. The meeting of the Notables on
Thursday, and the necessity of paying my court to our new minister,
will detain me till Friday, and perhaps till Tuesday next. Nothing is
known yet of the objects of this Assembly. I enclose you two new
pamphlets relative to it, and will inform you of whatever I can
discover relative to it during my stay. I learn with real pain the
resolution you have taken of quitting Europe. Your presence on this
side the Atlantic gave me a confidence that, if any difficulties should
arise within my department, I should always have one to advise with, on
whose counsels I could rely. I shall now feel bewidowed. I do not
wonder at your being tired out by the conduct of the court you are at.
But is there not room to do a great deal of good for us in Holland in
the department of money? No one can do it as well as yourself. But you
have taken your resolution on mature consideration, and I have nothing
to offer, therefore, but my regrets. If anything transpires from the
Notables before my departure worth communication, you shall yet hear
from me. In the meantime, believe me to be, with sincere esteem and
respect, dear Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO HIS EXCELLENCY MR. ADAMS.

PARIS, February 23, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--The Notables met yesterday; the King opened the Assembly
with a short speech, wherein he expressed his inclination to consult
with them on the affairs of his kingdom, to receive their opinions on
the plans he had digested, and to endeavor to imitate the head of his
family, Henry IV., whose name is so dear to the nation. The speech was
affectionate. The Garde des Sceaux spoke about twenty minutes,
complimented the clergy, the noblesse, the magistrates and tiers √àtats.
The Comptroller General spoke about an hour. He enumerated the expenses
necessary to arrange his department when he came into it; he said his
returns had been minutely laid before the King; he took a review of the
preceding administrations, and more particularly of Mr. Neckar's; he
detailed the improvement which had been made; he portrayed the present
state of the finances, and sketched the several schemes proposed for
their improvement; he spoke on a change in the form of the taxes, the
removal of the interior custom-houses to the frontiers, provincial
administrations and some other objects. The Assembly was then divided
into committees. To-day, there was to be another grand Assembly, the
plans more fully explained and referred to the discussion of the
committees. The grand Assembly will meet once a week and vote
individually. The propriety of my attending the first audience day of
Count Montmorin, which will not be till the 27th, retards my departure
till then.

I have read your book with infinite satisfaction and improvement. It
will do great good in America. Its learning and its good sense will, I
hope, make it an institute for our politicians, old as well as young.
There is one opinion in it, however, which I will ask you to
reconsider, because it appears to me not entirely accurate, and not
likely to do good. Page 362, "Congress is not a legislative, but a
diplomatic assembly." Separating into parts the whole sovereignty of
our States, some of these parts are yielded to Congress. Upon these I
should think them both legislative and executive, and that would have
been judiciary also, had not the confederation required them for
certain purposes to appoint a judiciary. It has accordingly been the
decision of our courts that the confederation is a part of the law of
the land, and superior in authority to the ordinary laws, because it
cannot be altered by the legislature of any one State. I doubt whether
they are at all a diplomatic assembly. On the first news of this work
there were proposals to translate it. Fearing it might be murdered in
that operation, I endeavored to secure a good translator. This is done,
and I lend him my copy to translate from. It will be immediately
announced to keep others from attempting it. I am, with sincere esteem
and respect, dear Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

PARIS, February 23, 1787.


SIR,--The Assembl√àe des Notables being an event in the history of this
country which excites notice, I have supposed it would not be
disagreeable to you to learn its immediate objects, though no way
connected with our interests. The Assembly met yesterday; the King, in
a short but affectionate speech, informed them of his wish to consult
with them on the plans he had digested, and on the general good of his
people, and his desire to imitate the head of his family, Henry IV.,
whose memory is so dear to the nation. The Garde des Sceaux then spoke
about twenty minutes, chiefly in compliment to the orders present. The
Comptroller General, in a speech of about an hour, opened the budget,
and enlarged on the several subjects which will be under their
deliberation. He explained the situation of the finances at his
accession to office, the expenses which their arrangement had rendered
necessary, their present state, with the improvements made in them, the
several plans which had been proposed for their future improvement, a
change in the form of some of their taxes, the removal of the interior
custom-houses to the frontiers, and the institution of Provincial
Assemblies. The Assembly was then divided into committees, with a
prince of the blood at the head of each. In this form, they are to
discuss separately the subjects which will be submitted to them. Their
decision will be reported by two members to the minister, who, on view
of the separate decisions of all the committees, will make such changes
in his plans as will best accommodate them to their views, without too
much departing from his own, and will then submit them to the vote (but
I believe not to the debate) of the General Assembly, which will be
convened for this purpose one day in every week, and will vote
individually.

The event of the Count de Vergennes' death, of which I had the honor to
inform you in a letter of the 14th instant, the appointment of the
Count Montmorin, and the propriety of my attending at his first
audience, which will be on the 27th, have retarded the journey I had
proposed, a few days.

I shall hope, on my return, to meet here new powers for the consular
convention, as under those I have, it will be impossible to make the
changes in the convention which may be wished for.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem and
respect, Sir, your most obedient and most humble servant.




TO RICHARD PETERS.

PARIS, February 26, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--Your favor of October 1, covering the letter and bill to
Captain Capitaine, did not come to my hands till yesterday. I wrote to
him immediately, to inform him it should be delivered here at any
moment. We talk and think of nothing here but the Assembl√àe des
Notables. Were all the puns collected, to which this Assembly has given
rise, I think they would make a larger volume than the "Encyclop√àdie."
The government is said to want eighty millions of livres revenue more
than they have. They propose to give to the people provincial
administrations, and to make other improvements. It is a pity they had
not more of the virtue called economy, of which we have something to
spare. I hope the company of Mrs. Peters and your little ones have
cured all your aches and pains both of body and mind. That you and they
may continue forever clear of them, is the sincere prayer of, dear Sir,
your friend and servant.




TO THE MARQUIS DE LA FAYETTE.

PARIS, February 28, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I am just now in the moment of my departure. Monsieur de
Montmorin having given us audience at Paris yesterday, I missed the
opportunity of seeing you once more. I am extremely pleased with his
modesty, the simplicity of his manners, and his dispositions toward us.
I promise myself a great deal of satisfaction in doing business with
him. I hope he will not give ear to any unfriendly suggestions. I
flatter myself I shall hear from you sometimes. Send your letters to my
hotel, as usual, and they will be forwarded to me. I wish you success
in your meeting. I should form better hopes of it, if it were divided
into two Houses, instead of seven. Keeping the good model of your
neighboring country before your eyes, you may get on, step by step,
towards a good constitution. Though that model is not perfect, yet, as
it would unite more suffrages than any new one which could be proposed,
it is better to make that the object. If every advance is to be
purchased by filling the royal coffers with gold, it will be gold well
employed. The King, who means so well, should be encouraged to repeat
these Assemblies. You see how we republicans are apt to preach, when we
get on politics. Adieu, my dear friend. Yours affectionately.




TO MADAME LA COMTESSE DE TESSE.

NISMES, March 20, 1787.


Here I am, Madam, gazing whole hours at the Maison Quarr√àe, like a
lover at his mistress. The stocking weavers and silk spinners around it
consider me a hypochondriac Englishman, about to write with a pistol
the last chapter of his history. This is the second time I have been in
love since I left Paris. The first was with a Diana at the Chateau de
Laye-Epinaye in Beaujolois, a delicious morsel of sculpture, by M. A.
Slodtz. This, you will say, was in rule, to fall in love with a female
beauty; but with a house! it is out of all precedent. No, Madam, it is
not without a precedent in my own history. While in Paris, I was
violently smitten with the Hotel de Salm, and used to go to the
Tuileries almost daily, to look at it. The _loueuse des chaises_,
inattentive to my passion, never had the complaisance to place a chair
there, so that, sitting on the parapet, and twisting my neck round to
see the object of my admiration, I generally left it with a
_torti-colli_.

From Lyons to Nismes I have been nourished with the remains of Roman
grandeur. They have always brought you to my mind, because I know your
affection for whatever is Roman and noble. At Vienna I thought of you.
But I am glad you were not there; for you would have seen me more angry
than, I hope, you will ever see me. The Pr√ätorian Palace, as it is
called, comparable, for its fine proportions, to the Maison Quarr√àe,
defaced by the barbarians who have converted it to its present purpose,
its beautiful fluted Corinthian columns cut out, in part, to make space
for Gothic windows, and hewed down, in the residue, to the plane of the
building, was enough, you must admit, to disturb my composure. At
Orange, too, I thought of you. I was sure you had seen with pleasure
the sublime triumphal arch of Marius at the entrance of the city. I
went then to the Aren√ä. Would you believe, Madam, that in this
eighteenth century, in France, under the reign of Louis XVI., they are
at this moment pulling down the circular wall of this superb remain, to
pave a road? And that, too, from a hill which is itself an entire mass
of stone, just as fit, and more accessible? A former intendant, a M. de
Basville, has rendered his memory dear to the traveller and amateur, by
the pains he took to preserve and restore these monuments of antiquity.
The present one (I do not know who he is) is demolishing the object, to
make a good road to it. I thought of you again, and I was then in great
good humor, at the Pont du Gard, a sublime antiquity, and well
preserved. But most of all here, where Roman taste, genius, and
magnificence, excite ideas analogous to yours at every step. I could no
longer oppose the inclination to avail myself of your permission to
write to you, a permission given with too much complaisance by you, and
used by me with too much indiscretion. Madame de Tott did me the same
honor. But she, being only the descendant of some of those puny heroes
who boiled their own kettles before the walls of Troy, I shall write to
her from a Grecian, rather than a Roman canton; when I shall find
myself, for example, among her Phoc√äan relations at Marseilles.

Loving, as you do Madam, the precious remains of antiquity, loving
architecture, gardening, a warm sun and a clear sky, I wonder you have
never thought of moving Chaville to Nismes. This, as you know, has not
always been deemed impracticable; and, therefore, the next time a
_Sur-intendant des batiments du roi_, after the example of M. Colbert,
sends persons to Nismes to move the Maison Quarr√àe to Paris, that they
may not come empty handed, desire them to bring Chaville with them, to
replace it. _¬ø propos_ of Paris. I have now been three weeks from
there, without knowing anything of what has passed. I suppose I shall
meet it all at Aix, where I have directed my letters to be lodged,
_poste restante_. My journey has given me leisure to reflect on this
Assembl√àe des Notables. Under a good and a young King, as the present,
I think good may be made of it. I would have the deputies then, by all
means, so conduct themselves as to encourage him to repeat the calls of
this Assembly. Their first step should be, to get themselves divided
into two chambers instead of seven; the Noblesse and the Commons
separately. The second, to persuade the King, instead of choosing the
deputies of the Commons himself, to summon those chosen by the people
for the Provincial administrations. The third, as the Noblesse is too
numerous to be all of the Assembl√àe, to obtain permission for that body
to choose its own deputies. Two Houses, so elected, would contain a
mass of wisdom which would make the people happy, and the King great;
would place him in history where no other act can possibly place him.
They would thus put themselves in the track of the best guide they can
follow; they would soon overtake it, become its guide in turn, and lead
to the wholesome modifications wanting in that model, and necessary to
constitute a rational government. Should they attempt more than the
established habits of the people are ripe for, they may lose all, and
retard indefinitely the ultimate object of their aim. These, Madam, are
my opinions; but I wish to know yours, which, I am sure, will be
better.

From a correspondent at Nismes, you will not expect news. Were I to
attempt to give you news, I should tell you stories one thousand years
old. I should detail to you the intrigues of the courts of the C√äsars,
how they affect us here, the oppressions of their pr√ätors, prefects,
&c. I am immersed in antiquities from morning to night. For me, the
city of Rome is actually existing in all the splendor of its empire. I
am filled with alarms for the event of the irruptions daily making on
us, by the Goths, the Visigoths, Ostrogoths, and Vandals, lest they
should re-conquer us to our original barbarism. If I am sometimes
induced to look forward to the eighteenth century, it is only when
recalled to it by the recollection of your goodness and friendship, and
by those sentiments of sincere esteem and respect with which I have the
honor to be Madam, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO THE MARQUIS DE LA FAYETTE.

NICE, April 11, 1787.


Your head, my dear friend, is full of notable things; and being better
employed, therefore, I do not expect letters from you. I am constantly
roving about, to see what I have never seen before, and shall never see
again. In the great cities, I go to see what travellers think alone
worthy of being seen; but I make a job of it, and generally gulp it all
down in a day. On the other hand, I am never satiated with rambling
through the fields and farms, examining the culture and cultivators,
with a degree of curiosity which makes some take me to be a fool, and
others to be much wiser than I am. I have been pleased to find among
the people a less degree of physical misery than I had expected. They
are generally well clothed, and have a plenty of food, not animal
indeed, but vegetable, which is as wholesome. Perhaps they are
over-worked, the excess of the rent required by the landlord obliging
them to too many hours of labor in order to produce that, and wherewith
to feed and clothe themselves. The soil of Champagne and Burgundy I
have found more universally good than I had expected, and as I could
not help making a comparison with England, I found that comparison more
unfavorable to the latter than is generally admitted. The soil, the
climate, and the productions are superior to those of England, and the
husbandry as good, except in one point; that of manure. In England,
long leases for twenty-one years, or three lives, to wit, that of the
farmer, his wife, and son, renewed by the son as soon as he comes to
the possession, for his own life, his wife's and eldest child's, and so
on, render the farms there almost hereditary, make it worth the
farmer's while to manure the lands highly, and give the landlord an
opportunity of occasionally making his rent keep pace with the improved
state of the lands. Here the leases are either during pleasure, or for
three, six, or nine years, which does not give the farmer time to repay
himself for the expensive operation of well manuring, and, therefore,
he manures ill, or not at all. I suppose, that could the practice of
leasing for three lives be introduced in the whole kingdom, it would,
within the term of your life, increase agricultural productions fifty
per cent.; or were any one proprietor to do it with his own lands, it
would increase his rents fifty per cent., in the course of twenty-five
years. But I am told the laws do not permit it. The laws then, in this
particular, are unwise and unjust, and ought to give that permission.
In the southern provinces, where the soil is poor, the climate hot and
dry, and there are few animals, they would learn the art, found so
precious in England, of making vegetable manure, and thus improving
these provinces in the article in which nature has been least kind to
them. Indeed, these provinces afford a singular spectacle. Calculating
on the poverty of their soil, and their climate by its latitude only,
they should have been the poorest in France. On the contrary, they are
the richest, from one fortuitous circumstance. Spurs or ramifications
of high mountains, making down from the Alps, and, as it were,
reticulating these provinces, give to the valleys the protection of a
particular inclosure to each, and the benefit of a general stagnation
of the northern winds produced by the whole of them, and thus
countervail the advantage of several degrees of latitude. From the
first olive fields of Pierrelatte, to the orangeries of Hieres, has
been continued rapture to me. I have often wished for you. I think you
have not made this journey. It is a pleasure you have to come, and an
improvement to be added to the many you have already made. It will be a
great comfort to you, to know, from your own inspection, the condition
of all the provinces of your own country, and it will be interesting to
them at some future day, to be known to you. This is, perhaps, the only
moment of your life in which you can acquire that knowledge. And to do
it most effectually, you must be absolutely incognito, you must ferret
the people out of their hovels as I have done, look into their kettles,
eat their bread, loll on their beds under pretence of resting yourself,
but in fact, to find if they are soft. You will feel a sublime pleasure
in the course of this investigation, and a sublimer one hereafter, when
you shall be able to apply your knowledge to the softening of their
beds, or the throwing a morsel of meat into their kettle of vegetables.

You will not wonder at the subjects of my letters; they are the only
ones which have been presented to my mind for some time past; and the
waters must always be what are the fountains from which they flow.
According to this, indeed, I should have intermixed, from beginning to
end, warm expressions of friendship to you. But according to the ideas
of our country, we do not permit ourselves to speak even truths, when
they may have the air of flattery. I content myself, therefore, with
saying once for all, that I love you, your wife and children. Tell them
so, and adieu. Yours affectionately.




TO WILLIAM SHORT.

NICE, April 12, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--At Marseilles, they told me I should encounter the rice
fields of Piedmont soon after crossing the Alps. Here they tell me
there are none nearer than Vercelli and Novarra, which is carrying me
almost to Milan. I fear that this circumstance will occasion me a
greater delay than I had calculated on. However I am embarked in the
project, and shall go through with it. To-morrow, I set out on my
passage over the Alps, being to pursue it ninety-three miles to Coni,
on mules, as the snows are not yet enough melted to admit carriages to
pass. I leave mine here, therefore, proposing to return by water from
Genoa. I think it will be three weeks before I get back to Nice. I find
this climate quite as delightful as it has been represented. Hieres is
the only place in France, which may be compared with it. The climates
are equal. In favor of this place, are the circumstances of gay and
dissipated society, a handsome city, good accommodations, and some
commerce. In favor of Hieres, are environs of delicious and extensive
plains, a society more contracted, and therefore more capable of
esteem, and the neighborhood of Toulon, Marseilles and other places, to
which excursions may be made. Placing Marseilles in comparison with
Hieres, it has extensive society, a good theatre, freedom from military
control, and the most animated commerce. But its winter climate is far
inferior. I am now in the act of putting my baggage into portable form
for my bat-mule; after praying you therefore, to let my daughter know I
am well, and that I shall not be heard of again in three weeks, I take
my leave of you for that time, with assurances of the sincere esteem
with which I am, dear Sir, your friend and servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

MARSEILLES, May 4, 1787.


SIR,--I had the honor of receiving at Aix your letter of February the
9th, and immediately wrote to the Count de Montmorin, explaining the
delay of the answer of Congress to the King's letter, and desired Mr.
Short to deliver that answer with my letter to Monsieur de Montmorin,
which he informs me he has accordingly done.

My absence prevented my noting to you, in the first moment, the
revolution which has taken place at Paris, in the department of
finance, by the substitution of Monsieur de Fourqueux in the place of
Monsieur de Calonne, so that you will have heard of it through other
channels before this will have the honor of reaching you.

Having staid at Aix long enough to prove the inefficacy of the waters,
I came on to this place for the purpose of informing myself here, as I
mean to do at the other sea-port towns, of whatever may be interesting
to our commerce. So far as carried on in our own bottoms, I find it
almost nothing, and so it must probably remain till something can be
done with the Algerines. Though severely afflicted with the plague,
they have come out within these few days, and showed themselves in
force along the coast of Genoa, cannonading a little town and taking
several vessels.

Among other objects of inquiry, this was the place to learn something
more certain on the subject of rice, as it is a great emporium for that
of the Levant and of Italy. I wished particularly to know whether it
was the use of a different machine for cleaning, which brought European
rice to market less broken than ours, as had been represented to me by
those who deal in that article in Paris. I found several persons who
had passed through the rice country of Italy, but not one who could
explain to me the nature of the machine. But I was given to believe
that I might see it myself immediately on entering Piedmont. As this
would require but about three weeks, I determined to go and ascertain
this point, as the chance only of placing our rice above all rivalship
in quality, as it is in color, by the introduction of a better machine,
if a better existed, seemed to justify the application of that much
time to it. I found the rice country to be in truth Lombardy, one
hundred miles further than had been represented, and that though called
Piedmont rice, not a grain is made in the country of Piedmont. I passed
through the rice fields of the Venellese and Milanese, about sixty
miles, and returned from thence last night, having found that the
machine is absolutely the same as ours, and of course, that we need not
listen more to that suggestion. It is a difference in the species of
grain, of which the government of Turin is so sensible, that, as I was
informed, they prohibit the exportation of rough rice on pain of death.
I have taken measures, however, which I think will not fail for
obtaining a quantity of it, and I bought on the spot a small parcel,
which I have with me. As further details on this subject to Congress
would be misplaced, I propose, on my return to Paris, to communicate
them, and send the rice to the society at Charleston for promoting
agriculture, supposing that they will be best able to try the
experiment of cultivating the rice of this quality, and to communicate
the species to the two States of South Carolina and Georgia, if they
find it answer. I thought the staple 'of these two States was entitled
to this attention, and that it must be desirable to them to be able to
furnish rice of the two qualities demanded in Europe, especially, as
the greater consumption is in the forms for which the Lombardy quality
is preferred. The mass of our countrymen being interested in
agriculture, I hope I do not err in supposing that in a time of
profound peace, as the present, to enable them to adapt their
productions to the market, to point out markets for them, and endeavor
to obtain favorable terms of reception, is within the line of my duty.

My journey into this part of the country has procured me information
which I will take the liberty of communicating to Congress. In October
last I received a letter dated Montpelier, October the 2d, 1786,
announcing to me that the writer was a foreigner, who had a matter of
very great consequence to communicate to me, and desired I would
indicate the channel through which it might pass safely. I did so.

I received soon after a letter in the following words, omitting only
the formal parts. [_A translation of it is here given._]

"I am a native of Brazil. You are not ignorant of the frightful slavery
under which my country groans. This continually becomes more
insupportable since the epoch of your glorious independence, for the
cruel Portuguese omit nothing which can render our condition more
wretched, from an apprehension that we may follow your example. The
conviction, that these usurpers against the laws of nature and humanity
only meditate new oppressions, has decided us to follow the guiding
light which you have held out to us, to break our chains, to revive our
almost expiring liberty, which is nearly overwhelmed by that force,
which is the sole foundation of the authority that Europeans exercise
over American. But it is necessary that some power should extend
assistance to the Brazilians, since Spain would certainly unite herself
with Portugal; and in spite of our advantages for defence, we could not
make it effectual, or, at least, it would be imprudent to hazard the
attempt without some assurance of success. In this state of affairs,
Sir, we can with propriety look only to the United States, not only
because we are following her example, but, moreover, because nature, in
making us inhabitants of the same continent, has in some sort united us
in the bonds of a common patriotism. On our part, we are prepared to
furnish the necessary supplies of money, and at all times to
acknowledge the debt of gratitude due to our benefactors. I have thus,
Sir, laid before you a summary of my views. It is in discharge of this
commission that I have come to France, since I could not effect it in
America without exciting suspicion. It now remains for you to decide
whether those views can be accomplished. Should you desire to consult
your nation on them, it is in my power to give you all the information
you may require."

As, by this time, I had been advised to try the waters of Aix, I wrote
to the gentleman my design, and that I would go off my road as far as
Nismes, under the pretext of seeing the antiquities of that place, if
he would meet me there. He met me, and the following is the sum of the
information I received from him: "Brazil contains as many inhabitants
as Portugal. They are, 1. Portuguese. 2. Native whites. 3. Black and
mulatto slaves. 4. Indians, civilized and savage. 1. The Portuguese are
few in number, mostly married there, have lost sight of their native
country, as well as the prospect of returning to it, and are disposed
to become independent. 2. The native whites form the body of their
nation. 3. The slaves are as numerous as the free. 4. The civilized
Indians have no energy, and the savage would not meddle. There are
twenty thousand regular troops. Originally these were Portuguese. But
as they died off, they were replaced by natives, so that these compose
at present the mass of the troops, and may be counted on by their
native country. The officers are partly Portuguese, partly Brazilians;
their bravery is not doubted, and they understand the parade, but not
the science of their profession. They have no bias for Portugal, but no
energy either for anything. The priests are partly Portuguese, partly
Brazilians, and will not interest themselves much. The Noblesse are
scarcely known as such. They will, in no manner, be distinguished from
the people. The men of letters are those most desirous of a revolution.
The people are not much under the influence of their priests, most of
them read and write, possess arms, and are in the habit of using them
for hunting. The slaves will take the side of their masters. In short,
as to the question of revolution, there is but one mind in that
country. But there appears no person capable of conducting a
revolution, or willing to venture himself at its head, without the aid
of some powerful nation, as the people of their own might fail them.
There is no printing press in Brazil. They consider the North American
revolution as a precedent for theirs. They look to the United States as
most likely to give them honest support, and, from a variety of
considerations, have the strongest prejudices in our favor. This
informant is a native and inhabitant of Rio Janeiro, the present
metropolis, which contains fifty thousand inhabitants, knows well St.
Salvador, the former one, and the mines d'or, which are in the centre
of the country. These are all for a revolution; and, constituting the
body of the nation, the other parts will follow them. The King's fifth
of the mines yields annually thirteen millions of crusadoes or half
dollars. He has the sole right of searching for diamonds and other
precious stones, which yield him about half as much. His income from
those two resources alone, then, is about ten millions of dollars
annually; but the remaining part of the produce of the mines, being
twenty-six millions, might be counted on for effecting a revolution.
Besides the arms in the hands of the people, there are public
magazines. They have abundance of horses, but only a part of their
country would admit the service of horses. They would want cannon,
ammunition, ships, sailors, soldiers and officers, for which they are
disposed to look to the United States, it being always understood that
every service and furniture will be well paid. Corn costs about twenty
livres the one hundred pounds. They have flesh in the greatest
abundance, insomuch, that in some parts they kill beeves for the skin
only. The whale fishery is carried on by Brazilians altogether, and not
by Portuguese; but in very small vessels, so that the fishermen know
nothing of managing a large ship. They would want of us, at all times,
shipping, corn and salt fish. The latter is a great article, and they
are at present supplied with it from Portugal. Portugal, being without
either army or navy, could not attempt an invasion under a twelvemonth.
Considering of what it would be composed, it would not be much to be
feared, and, if it failed, they would probably never attempt a second.
Indeed, this source of their wealth being intercepted, they are
scarcely capable of a first effort. The thinking part of the nation are
so sensible of this, that they consider an early separation inevitable.
There is an implacable hatred between the Brazilians and Portuguese; to
reconcile which, a former minister adopted the policy of letting the
Brazilians into a participation of public offices, but subsequent
administrations have reverted to the ancient policy of keeping the
administration in the hands of native Portuguese. There is a mixture of
natives of the old appointments still remaining in office. If Spain
should invade them on their southern extremities, these are so distant
from the body of their settlements, that they could not penetrate
thence; and Spanish enterprise is not formidable. The mines d'or are
among mountains inaccessible to any army, and Rio Janeiro is considered
the strongest port in the world after Gibraltar. In case of a
successful revolution, a republican government in a single body would
probably be established."

I took care to impress on him, through the whole of our conversation,
that I had neither instructions nor authority to say a word to anybody
on this subject, and that I could only give him my own ideas, as a
single individual; which were, that we were not in a condition at
present to meddle nationally in any war; that we wished particularly to
cultivate the friendship of Portugal, with whom we have an advantageous
commerce. That yet a successful revolution in Brazil could not be
uninteresting to us. That prospects of lucre might possibly draw
numbers of individuals to their aid, and purer motives our officers,
among whom are many excellent. That our citizens, being free to leave
their own country individually, without the consent of their
governments, are equally free to go to any other.

A little before I received the first letter of the Brazilian, a
gentleman informed me there was a Mexican in Paris, who wished to have
some conversation with me. He accordingly called on me. The substance
of the information I drew from him was as follows. He is himself a
native of Mexico, where his relations are, principally. He left it at
about seventeen years of age, and seems now to be about thirty-three or
thirty-four. He classes and characterizes the inhabitants of that
country, as follows: 1. The natives of Old Spain, possessed of most of
the offices of government, and firmly attached to it. 2. The clergy,
equally attached to the government. 3. The natives of Mexico, generally
disposed to revolt, but without instruction, without energy, and much
under the dominion of their priests. 4. The slaves, mulatto and black;
the former enterprising and intelligent, the latter brave, and of very
important weight, into whatever scale they throw themselves; but he
thinks they will side with their masters. 5. The conquered Indians,
cowardly, not likely to take any side, nor important which they take.
6. The free Indians, brave and formidable, should they interfere, but
not likely to do so, as being at a great distance. I asked him the
numbers of these several classes, but he could not give them. The
first, he thought very inconsiderable; that the second formed the body
of the freemen; the third equal to the two first the fourth, to all the
preceding; and, as to the fifth, he could form no idea of their
proportion. Indeed, it appeared to me, that his conjectures as to the
others, were on loose grounds. He said he knew from good information,
there were three hundred thousand inhabitants in the city of Mexico. I
was still more cautious with him than with the Brazilian, mentioning it
as my private opinion (unauthorized to say a word on the subject
otherwise) that a successful revolution was still at a distance with
them; that I feared they must begin by enlightening and emancipating
the minds of their people; that, as to us, if Spain should give us
advantageous terms of commerce, and remove other difficulties, it was
not probable that we should relinquish certain and present advantages,
though smaller, for uncertain and future ones, however great. I was led
into this caution by observing that this gentleman was intimate at the
Spanish ambassador's, and that he was then at Paris, employed by Spain
to settle her boundaries with France, on the Pyrenees. He had much the
air of candor, but that can be borrowed; so that I was not able to
decide about him in my own mind.

Led by a unity of subject, and a desire to give Congress as general a
view of the disposition of our southern countrymen, as my information
enables me, I will add an article which, old and insulated, I did not
think important enough to mention at the time I received it. You will
remember, Sir, that during the late war, the British papers often gave
details of a rebellion in Peru. The character of those papers
discredited the information. But the truth was, that the insurrections
were so general, that the event was long on the poise. Had Commodore
Johnson, then expected on that coast, touched and landed there two
thousand men, the dominion of Spain in that country would have been at
an end. They only wanted a point of union, which this body would have
constituted. Not having this, they acted without concert, and were at
length subdued separately. This conflagration was quenched in blood;
two hundred thousand souls, on both sides, having perished; but the
remaining matter is very capable of combustion. I have this information
from a person who was on the spot at the time, and whose good faith,
understanding, and means of information, leave no doubt of the facts.
He observed, however, that the numbers above supposed to have perished,
were on such conjectures only as he could collect.

I trouble Congress with these details, because, however distant we may
be, both in condition and dispositions, from taking an active part in
any commotions in that country, nature has placed it too near us, to
make its movements altogether indifferent to our interests, or to our
curiosity.

I hear of another _Arret_ of this court, increasing the duties on
foreign stock-fish, and the premium on their own, imported into their
islands; but not having yet seen it, I can say nothing certain on it. I
hope the effect of this policy will be defeated by the practice which,
I am told, takes place on the Banks of Newfoundland, of putting our
fish into the French fishing-boats, and the parties sharing the
premium, instead of ours paying the duty.

I am in hopes Mr. Short will be able to send you the medals of General
Gates, by this packet. I await a general instruction as to these
medals. The academies of Europe will be much pleased to receive each a
set.

I propose to set out the day after to-morrow for Bordeaux, (by the
canal of Languedoc,) Nantes, L'Orient and Paris.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem and
respect, Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO M. GUIDE.

MARSEILLES, May 6, 1787.


SIR,--A desire of seeing a commerce commenced between the dominions of
His Majesty, the King of Sardinia, and the United States of America,
and a direct exchange of their respective productions, without passing
through a third nation, led me into the conversation which I had the
honor of having with you on that subject, and afterwards with Monsieur
Tallon, at Turin, to whom I promised that I would explain to you, in
writing, the substance of what passed between us. The articles of your
produce wanted with us, are brandies, wines, oil, fruits, and
manufactured silks: those with which we can furnish you, are indigo,
potash, tobacco, flour, salt fish, furs and peltries, ships and
materials for building them. The supply of tobacco, particularly, being
in the hands of government solely, appeared to me to offer an article
for beginning immediately the experiment of direct commerce. That of
the first quality can be had, at first hand, only from James river, in
Virginia; those of the second and third, from the same place and from
Baltimore, in Maryland. The first quality is delivered in the ports of
France at thirty-eight livres the quintal, the second at thirty-six
livres, the third at thirty-four livres, weight and money of France, by
individuals generally. I send you the copy of a large contract, wherein
the three qualities are averaged at thirty-six livres. They may be
delivered at Nice for those prices. Indeed, it is my opinion, that by
making shipments of your own produce to those places, and buying the
tobaccos on the spot, they may be had more advantageously. In this
case, it would be expedient that merchants of Nice, Turin, and America,
should form a joint concern for conducting the business in the two
countries. Monsieur Tallon desired me to point out proper persons in
America, who might be addressed for this purpose. The house of the most
extensive reputation, concerned in the tobacco trade, and on the
firmest funds, is that of Messrs. Ross and Pleasants, at Richmond, in
Virginia. If it should be concluded, on your part, to make any attempt
of this kind, and to address yourselves to these gentlemen, or any
others, it would be the best to write them your ideas, and receive
theirs, before you make either purchases or shipments. A more hasty
conduct might occasion loss, and retard, instead of encouraging the
establishment of this commerce. I would undertake to write, at the same
time, to these, or any other merchants whom you should prefer, in order
to dispose them favorably, and as disinterestedly as possible, for the
encouragement of this essay. I must observe to you, that our vessels
are fearful of coming into the Mediterranean on account of the
Algerines; and that, if you should freight vessels, those of the French
will be most advantageous for you, because received into our ports
without paying any duties on some of those articles, and lighter than
others on all of them. English vessels, on the other hand, are
distinguished by paying heavier duties than those of any other nation.
Should you desire any further information, or to pass letters with
certainty to any mercantile house in America, do me the favor to
address yourselves to me, at Paris, and I shall do whatever depends on
me, for this object.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of high esteem and respect,
Sir, your most obedient humble servant.




TO WILLIAM CARMICHAEL.

PARIS, June 14, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--Having got back to Paris three days ago, I resume
immediately the correspondence with which you have been pleased to
honor me. I wish I could have begun it with more agreeable information
than that furnished me by Mr. Grand, that the funds of the United
States here are exhausted, and himself considerably in advance; and by
the Board of Treasury at New York, that they have no immediate prospect
of furnishing us supplies. We are thus left to shift for ourselves,
without previous warning. As soon as they shall replenish Mr. Grand's
hands, I will give you notice, that you may recommence your usual
drafts on him; unless the board should provide a separate fund for you,
dependent on yourself alone, which I have strongly and repeatedly
pressed on them, in order to remove the indecency of suffering your
drafts to pass through any intermediate hand for payment.

My letters from America came down to the 24th of April. The
disturbances in the Eastern States were entirely settled. I do not
learn that the government had made any examples. Mr. Hancock's health
being re-established, the want of which had occasioned him to resign
the government of Massachusetts, he has been re-elected to the
exclusion of Governor Bowdoin. New York still refuses to pass the
impost in any form, and, were she to pass it, Pennsylvania will not
uncouple it from the supplementary funds. These two States and Virginia
are the only ones, my letters say, which have paid anything into the
Continental treasury, for a twelve month past. I send you a copy of a
circular letter from Congress to the several States, insisting on their
removing all obstructions to the recovery of British debts. This was
hurried, that it might be delivered to the Assembly of New York before
they rose. It was delivered, but they did nothing in consequence of it.
The convention to be assembled at Philadelphia will be an able one. Ten
States were known to have appointed delegates. Maryland was about to
appoint; Connecticut was doubtful; and Rhode Island had refused. We are
sure, however, of eleven States. South Carolina has prohibited the
importation of slaves for three years; which is a step towards a
perpetual prohibition. Between six and seven hundred thousand acres of
land are actually surveyed into townships, and the sales are to begin
immediately. They are not to be sold for less than a dollar the acre,
in public certificates. I wrote you from Bordeaux on the subject of
Colonel Smith. I was sorry I missed him there, for other reasons as
well as from a curiosity to know his errand. The Notables have laid the
foundation of much good here; you have seen it detailed in the public
papers. The Prince of Wales is likely to recover from his illness,
which was very threatening. It is feared that three powers have
combined to lift the Prince of Orange out of his difficulties. Have you
yet the cypher of which I formerly wrote to you, or any copy of it?

I am, with sincere esteem, dear Sir, your most obedient, and most
humble servant.




TO MR. DUMAS.

PARIS, June 14, 1787.


SIR,--I arrived at this place three days ago, and avail myself of the
first possible moment of acknowledging the receipt of your favors of
the 5th and 7th of June. The letters they accompanied for Mr. Jay shall
be sent by the packet, which sails the 25th instant, and by a
passenger. My letters from America are none later than the 24th of
April. The disturbances in the Eastern States were entirely settled. I
do not learn that the government required any capital punishments. We
promise ourselves good from the Convention holding at Philadelphia. It
consists of the ablest men in America. It will surely be the instrument
of referring to Congress the regulation of our trade. This may enable
them to carry into effect a general impost which one or two obstinate
States have so long prevented. Between six and seven hundred thousand
acres of land are now surveyed into townships, and will be immediately
sold. The backwardness of the States to bring money into the public
treasury has increased rather than diminished. This has prevented the
treasury board from remitting any money to this place for some time
past, and Mr. Grand has given me notice that their funds in his hands
are exhausted, and himself considerably in advance. This renders it
necessary for us to suspend all draughts on him until he shall have
received supplies from the Board of Treasury, to whom I write to press
remittances. The moment we shall have wherewithal to answer your
accustomary draughts, I will exercise the pleasing office of giving you
notice of it. Indeed, I perceive by the papers that Mr. Adams is gone
over to Holland. I am not without hopes that his object may be to
procure supplies of money, and that your exertions joined with his may
give relief to us all. I have no answer from Congress on the subject
which has been thought of between us. I am afraid we may consider the
refusal of the impost as an answer. I am exceedingly anxious to see the
turn the affairs of your country may take. It will surely be seen soon
whether for the better or worse. I wish nothing may be gathering in the
horizon to obscure the prospects of the patriotic party. My prayers for
their prosperity are warm, as are the sentiments of personal esteem and
respect with which I have the honor to be, Sir, your most obedient, and
most humble servant.




TO J. BANNISTER, JUNIOR.

PARIS, June 19, 1787.


DEAR SIR--I have received your favor of April the 23d, from New York,
and am sorry to find you have had a relapse. Time and temperance,
however, will cure you; to which add exercise. I hope you have long ago
had a happy meeting with your friends, with whom a few hours would be
to me an ineffable feast. The face of Europe appears a little turbid,
but all will subside. The Empress endeavored to bully the Turk, who
laughed at her, and she is going back. The Emperor's reformations have
occasioned the appearance of insurrection in Flanders, and he,
according to character, will probably tread back his steps. A change of
system here, with respect to the Dutch, is suspected; because the Kings
of Prussia and England openly espouse the cause of the Stadtholder, and
that of the Patriots is likely to fall. The American acquaintances whom
you left here, not being stationary, you will hardly expect news of
them. Mrs. Barrett, lately dead, was, I think, known to you. I had a
letter from Ledyard lately, dated at St. Petersburg. He had but two
shirts, and yet more shirts than shillings. Still he was determined to
obtain the palm of being the first circumambulator of the earth. He
says, that having no money, they kick him from place to place, and thus
he expects to be kicked round the globe. Are you become a great walker?
You know I preach up that kind of exercise. Shall I send you a
_conte-pas_? It will cost you a dozen louis, but be a great stimulus to
walking, as it will record your steps. I finished my tour a week or ten
days ago. I went as far as Turin, Milan, Genoa; and never passed three
months and a half more delightfully. I returned through the canal of
Languedoc, by Bordeaux, Nantes, L'Orient, and Rennes; then returned to
Nantes and came up the Loire to Orleans. I was alone through the whole,
and think one travels more usefully when alone, because he reflects
more.

Present me in the most friendly terms to Mrs. Bannister, and to your
father, and be assured of the sincere esteem of, dear Sir, your friend
and servant.




TO JAMES MADISON.[3]

PARIS, June 20, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I wrote you last on the 30th of January, with a postscript
of February the 5th. Having set out the last day of that month to try
the waters of Aix, and been journeying since, till the 10th instant, I
have been unable to continue my correspondence with you. In the
meantime, I have received your several favors of February the 16th,
March the 18th and 19th, and April the 23d. The last arrived here about
the 25th of May, while those of March the 18th and 19th, though written
five weeks earlier, arrived three weeks later. I mention this to show
you how uncertain is the conveyance through England.

      [3] Much of this letter is in cypher, but the notes annexed to it
      have enabled the Editor to decipher and publish it.

The idea of separating the executive business of the confederacy from
Congress, as the judiciary is already, in some degree, is just and
necessary. I had frequently pressed on the members individually, while
in Congress, the doing this by a resolution of Congress for appointing
an executive committee, to act during the sessions of Congress, as the
committee of the States was to act during their vacations. But the
referring to this committee all executive business, as it should
present itself, would require a more persevering self-denial than I
suppose Congress to possess. It will be much better to make that
separation by a federal act. The negative, proposed to be given them on
all the acts of the several legislatures, is now, for the first time,
suggested to my mind. _Prima facie_, I do not like it. It fails in an
essential character; that the hole and the patch should be
commensurate. But this proposes to mend a small hole by covering the
whole garment. Not more than one out of one hundred State acts concern
the confederacy. This proposition, then, in order to give them one
degree of power, which they ought to have, gives them ninety-nine more,
which they ought not to have, upon a presumption that they will not
exercise the ninety-nine. But upon every act, there will be a
preliminary question, Does this act concern the confederacy? And was
there ever a proposition so plain, as to pass Congress without a
debate? Their decisions are almost always wise; they are like pure
metal. But you know of how much dross this is the result. Would not an
appeal from the State judicature to a federal court, in all cases where
the act of Confederation controlled the question, be as effectual a
remedy, and exactly commensurate to the defect? A British creditor, for
example, sues for his debt in Virginia; the defendant pleads an act of
the State, excluding him from their courts; the plaintiff urges the
Confederation, and the treaty made under that, as controlling the State
law; the judges are weak enough to decide according to the views of
their legislature. An appeal to a federal court sets all to rights. It
will be said, that this court may encroach on the jurisdiction of the
State courts. It may. But there will be a power, to wit, Congress, to
watch and restrain them. But place the same authority in Congress
itself, and there will be no power above them, to perform the same
office. They will restrain within due bounds, a jurisdiction exercised
by others, much more rigorously than if exercised by themselves.

I am uneasy at seeing that the sale of our western lands is not yet
commenced. That valuable fund for the immediate extinction of our debt
will, I fear, be suffered to slip through our fingers. Every delay
exposes it to events which no human foresight can guard against. When
we consider the temper of the people of that country, derived from the
circumstances which surround them, we must suppose their separation
possible, at every moment. If they can be retained till their
governments become settled and wise, they will remain with us always,
and be a precious part of our strength and our virtue. But this affair
of the Mississippi, by showing that Congress is capable of hesitating
on a question, which proposes a clear sacrifice of the western, to the
maritime States, will with difficulty be obliterated. The proposition
of my going to Madrid, to try to recover there the ground which has
been lost at New York, by the concession of the vote of seven States, I
should think desperate. With respect to myself, weighing the pleasure
of the journey and bare possibility of success, in one scale, and the
strong probability of failure and the public disappointment directed on
me, in the other, the latter preponderates. Add to this, that jealousy
might be excited in the breast of a person, who could find occasions of
making me uneasy.

The late changes in the ministry here excite considerable hopes. I
think we gain in them all. I am particularly happy at the re-entry of
Malesherbes into the Council, His knowledge and integrity render his
value inappreciable, and the greater to me, because, while he had no
views of office, we had established together the most unreserved
intimacy. So far, too, I am pleased with Montmorin. His honesty
proceeds from the heart as well as the head, and therefore may be more
surely counted on. The King loves business, economy, order, and
justice, and wishes sincerely the good of his people; but he is
irascible, rude, very limited in his understanding, and religious,
bordering on bigotry. He has no mistress, loves his queen, and is too
much governed by her. She is capricious like her brother, and governed
by him; devoted to pleasure and expense; and not remarkable for any
other vices or virtues. Unhappily the King shows a propensity for the
pleasures of the table. That for drink has increased lately, or, at
least, it has become more known.

For European news in general, I will refer you to my letter to Mr. Jay.
Is it not possible, that the occurrences in Holland may excite a desire
in many, of leaving that country and transferring their effects out of
it, and thus make an opening for shifting into their hands, the debts
due to this country, to its officers, and Farmers? It would be surely
eligible. I believe Dumas, if put on the watch, might alone suffice;
but he surely might, if Mr. Adams should go when the moment offers.
Dumas has been in the habit of sending his letters open to me, to be
forwarded to Mr. Jay. During my absence, they passed through Mr.
Short's hands, who made extracts from them, by which I see he has been
recommending himself and me for the money negotiations in Holland. It
might be thought, perhaps, that I have encouraged him in this. Be
assured, my dear Sir, that no such idea ever entered my head. On the
contrary, it is a business which would be the most disagreeable to me
of all others, and for which I am the most unfit person living. I do
not understand bargaining, nor possess the dexterity requisite for the
purpose. On the other hand, Mr. Adams, whom I expressly and sincerely
recommend, stands already on ground for that business, which I could
not gain in years. Pray set me to rights in the minds of those who may
have supposed me privy to this proposition. _En passant_, I will
observe with respect to Mr. Dumas, that the death of the Count de
Vergennes places Congress more at their ease, how to dispose of him.
Our credit has been ill treated here in public debate, and our debt
here deemed apocryphal. We should try to transfer this debt elsewhere,
and leave nothing capable of exciting ill thoughts between us. I shall
mention in my letter to Mr. Jay, a disagreeable affair which Mr.
Barclay has been thrown into, at Bordeaux. An honester man cannot be
found, nor a slower, nor more indecisive one. His affairs, too, are so
embarrassed and desperate, that the public reputation is, every moment,
in danger of being compromitted with him. He is perfectly amiable and
honest, with all his embarrassments.

By the next packet, I shall be able to send you some books, as also
your watch and pedometer. The two last are not yet done. To search for
books, and forward them to Havre, will require more time than I had
between my return and the departure of this packet. Having been a
witness, heretofore, to the divisions in Congress on the subject of
their foreign ministers, it would be a weakness in me to suppose none
with respect to myself, or to count with any confidence on the renewal
of my commission, which expires on the 10th day of March next; and the
more so, as instead of requiring the disapprobation of seven States, as
formerly, that of one suffices for a recall, when Congress consists of
only seven States, two, when of eight, &c., which I suppose to be
habitually their numbers at present. Whenever I leave this place, it
will be necessary to begin my arrangements six months before my
departure; and these, once fairly begun and under way, and my mind set
homewards, a change of purpose could hardly take place. If it should be
the desire of Congress that I should continue still longer, I could
wish to know it, at farthest, by the packet which will sail from New
York in September. Because, were I to put off longer the quitting my
house, selling my furniture, &c., I should not have time left to wind
up my affairs; and having once quitted, and sold off my furniture, I
could not think of establishing myself here again. I take the liberty
of mentioning this matter to you, not with a desire to change the
purpose of Congress, but to know it in time. I have never fixed in my
mind, the epoch of my return, so far as shall depend on myself, but I
never supposed it very distant. Probably I shall not risk a second vote
on this subject. Such trifling things may draw on me the displeasure of
one or two States, and thus submit me to the disgrace of a recall.

I thank you for the paccan nuts, which accompanied your letter of
March. Could you procure me a copy of the bill for proportioning crimes
and punishments, in the form in which it was ultimately rejected by the
House of Delegates? Young Mr. Bannister desired me to send him
regularly the _Mercure de France_. I will ask leave to do this through
you, and that you will adopt such method of forwarding them to him, as
will save him from being submitted to postage, which they would not be
worth. As a compensation for your trouble, you will be free to keep
them till you shall have read them. I am, with sentiments of the most
sincere esteem, dear Sir, your friend and servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

PARIS, June 21, 1787


SIR,--I had the honor of addressing you in a letter of May the 4th,
from Marseilles, which was to have gone by the last packet. But it
arrived a few hours too late for that conveyance, and has been
committed to a private one, passing through England, with a promise
that it should go through no post office.

I was desirous, while at the seaports, to obtain a list of the American
vessels which have come to them since the peace, in order to estimate
their comparative importance to us, as well as the general amount of
our commerce with this country, so far as carried on in our own
bottoms. At Marseilles, I found there had been thirty-two, since that
period; at Cette, not a single one; at Bayonne, one of our free ports,
only one. This last fact I learned from other information, not having
visited that place; as it would have been a deviation from my route,
too considerable for the importance of the object. At Bordeaux, Nantes,
and L'Orient, I could not obtain lists in the moment; but am in hopes I
shall be able to get them ere long. Though more important to us, they
will probably be more imperfect than that of Marseilles. At Nantes, I
began with Monsieur Dobr√àe an arrangement of his claims. I visited the
military stores, which have been detained there so long, opened some
boxes of each kind, and found the state of their contents much better
than had been represented. An exact list of the articles is to be sent
me.

The importations into L'Orient of other fish oils, besides those of the
whale, brought to my notice there a defect in the letter of Monsieur de
Calonne, of October the 22d, which letter was formerly communicated to
you. In that, _whale_ oil only was named. The other fish oils,
therefore, have continued to pay the old duties. In a conference with
Monsieur de Villedeuil, the present Comptroller General, since my
return, I proposed the extending the exemption to all _fish oils_,
according to the letter of the Hanseatic treaty, which had formed the
basis of the regulations respecting us. I think this will be agreed to.
The delays of office first, then the illness of Monsieur de Calonne,
and lastly, his removal and the throng of business occasioned by the
Assembl√àe des Notables, have prevented the reducing the substance of
the letter into the form of an _Arret_, as yet; though I have continued
soliciting it as much as circumstances would bear. I am now promised
that it shall be done immediately, and that it shall be so far
retrospective to the date of the letter, as that all duties paid since
that, shall be refunded.

The new accessions to the ministry are valued here. Good is hoped from
the Archbishop of Toulouse, who succeeds the Count de Vergennes as
_Chef du Counseil de Finance_. Monsieur de Villedeuil, the Comptroller
General, has been approved by the public, in the offices he has
heretofore exercised. The Duke de Nivernois, called to the Council, is
reckoned a good and able man; and Monsieur de Malesherbes, called also
to the Council, is unquestionably the first character in the kingdom,
for integrity, patriotism, knowledge, and experience in business. There
is a fear that the Mar√àchal de Castries is disposed to retire.

The face of things in Europe is a little turbid at present; but
probably all will subside. The Empress of Russia, it is supposed, will
not push her pretensions against the Turks to actual war. Weighing the
fondness of the Emperor for innovation, against his want of
perseverance, it is difficult to calculate what he will do with his
discontented subjects in Brabant and Flanders. If those provinces alone
were concerned, he would probably give back; but this would induce an
opposition to his plan, in all his other dominions. Perhaps he may be
able to find a compromise. The cause of the Patriots in Holland is a
little clouded at present. England and Prussia seem disposed to
interpose effectually. The former has actually ordered a fleet of six
sail of the line, northwardly, under Gore; and the latter threatens to
put her troops into motion. The danger of losing such a weight in their
scale, as that of Prussia, would occasion this court to prefer
conciliation to war. Add to this the distress of their finances, and
perhaps not so warm a zeal in the new ministry for the innovations in
Holland. I hardly believe they will think it worth while to purchase
the change of constitution proposed there, at the expense of a war. But
of these things you will receive more particular and more certain
details from Mr. Dumas, to whom they belong.

Mr. Eden is appointed Ambassador from England to Madrid. To the hatred
borne us by his court and country, is added a recollection of the
circumstances of the unsuccessful embassy to America, of which he made
a part. So that I think he will carry to Madrid dispositions to do us
all the ill he can.

The late change in the ministry is very favorable to the prospects of
the Chevalier de La Luzerne. The Count de Montmorin, Monsieur de
Malesherbes, and Monsieur de Lamoignon, the Garde des Sceaux, are his
near relations. Probably something will be done for him, and without
delay. The promise of the former administration to the Count de
Moutier, to succeed to this vacancy, should it take place, will perhaps
be performed by the present one.

Mr. Barclay has probably informed you of his having been arrested in
Bordeaux, for a debt contracted in the way of his commerce. He
immediately applied to the parliament of that place, who ordered his
discharge. This took place after five days' actual imprisonment. I
arrived at Bordeaux a few days after his liberation. As the Procureur
General of the King had interested himself to obtain it, with uncommon
zeal, and that too on public principles, I thought it my duty to wait
on him and return him my thanks. I did the same to the president of the
parliament, for the body over which he presided; what would have been
an insult in America, being an indispensable duty here. You will see by
the enclosed printed paper, on what grounds the Procureur insisted on
Mr. Barclay's liberation. Those on which the parliament ordered it, are
not expressed. On my arrival here, I spoke with the minister on that
subject. He observed that the character of consul is no protection in
this country against process for debt; that as to the character with
which Mr. Barclay had been invested at the court of Morocco, it was
questionable whether it would be placed on the diplomatic line, as it
had not been derived immediately from Congress; that, if it were, it
would have covered him to Paris only, where he had received his
commission, had he proceeded directly thither, but that his long stay
at Bordeaux must be considered as terminating it there. I observed to
him, that Mr. Barclay had been arrested almost immediately on his
arrival at Bordeaux. But, says he, the arrest was made void by the
parliament, and still he has continued there several weeks. True, I
replied, but his adversaries declared they would arrest him again, the
moment he should go out of the jurisdiction of the parliament of
Bordeaux, and have actually engaged the Mar√àchauss√àe on the road, to do
it. This seemed to impress him. He said he could obtain a letter of
safe conduct which would protect him to Paris, but that, immediately on
his arrival here, he would be liable to arrest. I asked him if such a
letter could not be obtained to protect him to Paris, and back to
Bordeaux, and even to America? He said, that for that, the consent of
the greater part of his creditors would be necessary; and even with
this, it was very doubtful whether it could be obtained; still if I
would furnish him with that consent, he would do what should depend on
him. I am persuaded he will, and have written to Mr. Barclay to obtain
the consent of his creditors. This is the footing on which this matter
stands at present. I have stated it thus particularly, that you may
know the truth, which will probably be misrepresented in the English
papers, to the prejudice of Mr. Barclay. This matter has been a great
affliction to him, but no dishonor, where its true state is known.
Indeed he is incapable of doing anything not strictly honorable.

In a letter of August the 30th, 1785, I had the honor of mentioning to
you what had passed here, on the subject of a convention for the
regulation of the two post offices. I now enclose you a letter from the
Baron D'Ogny, who is at the head of that department, which shows that
he still expects some arrangement. I have heard it said that M. de
Creve-coeur is authorized to treat on this subject. You doubtless know
if this be true. The articles may certainly be better adjusted there,
than here. This letter from the Baron D'Ogny was in consequence of an
application from a servant of mine, during my absence, which would not
have been made had I been here. Nor will it be repeated; it being my
opinion and practice to pay small sums of money, rather than to risk
favors.

I have the honor to enclose you also, copies of a letter and papers
from the Mar√àchal de Castries, on the claim of an individual against
the State of South Carolina, for services performed on board the
Indian; and the petition of another, on a like claim; also copies of
letters received from O'Bryan at Algiers, and from Mr. Lambe. A letter
of the 26th of May, from Mr. Montgomery, at Alicant, informs me, that
by a vessel arrived at Carthagena from Algiers, they learn the death of
the Dey of that republic. Yet, as we hear nothing of it through any
other channel, it may be doubted. It escaped me at the time of my
departure to Aix, to make arrangements for sending you the gazettes
regularly, by the packets. The whole are now sent, though a great part
of them are so old as to be not worth perusal. Your favor of April the
24th has been duly received. I have the honor to be, with sentiments of
the most perfect esteem and respect, Sir, your most obedient, and most
humble servant.




TO MADAME DE CORNY.

PARIS, June 30, 1787.


On my return to Paris, it was among my first intentions to go to the
rue Chuss√àe d'Antin, No. 17, and inquire after my friends whom I had
left there. I was told they were in England. And how do you like
England, Madam? I know your taste for the works of art gives you a
little disposition to Anglomania. Their mechanics certainly exceed all
others in some lines. But be just to your own nation. They have not
patience, it is true, to set rubbing a piece of steel from morning till
night, as a lethargic Englishman will do, full charged with porter. But
do not their benevolence, their cheerfulness, their amiability, when
compared with the growling temper and manners of the people among whom
you are, compensate their want of patience? I am in hopes that when the
splendor of their shops, which is all that is worth looking at in
London, shall have lost their charm of novelty, you will turn a wistful
eye to the people of Paris, and find that you cannot be so happy with
any others. The Bois de Boulogne invites you earnestly to come and
survey its beautiful verdure, to retire to its umbrage from the heats
of the season. I was through it to-day, as I am every day. Every tree
charged me with this invitation to you. Passing by la Muette, it wished
for you as a mistress. You want a country house. This is for sale; and
in the Bois de Boulogne, which I have always insisted to be most worthy
of your preference. Come then, and buy it. If I had had confidence in
your speedy return, I should have embarrassed you in earnest with my
little daughter. But an impatience to have her with me, after her
separation from her friends, added to a respect for your ease, has
induced me to send a servant for her.

I tell you no news, because you have correspondents infinitely more _au
fait_ of the details of Paris than I am. And I offer you no services,
because I hope you will come as soon as the letter could, which should
command them. Be assured, however, that nobody is more disposed to
render them, nor entertains for you a more sincere and respectful
attachment, than him who, after charging you with his compliments to
Monsieur de Corny, has the honor of offering you the homage of those
sentiments of distinguished esteem and regard, with which he is, dear
Madam, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO JOHN ADAMS.

PARIS, July 1, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I returned about three weeks ago from a very useless voyage;
useless, I mean, as to the object which first suggested it, that of
trying the effect of the mineral waters of Aix, in Provence, on my
hand. I tried these, because recommended among six or eight others as
equally beneficial, and because they would place me at the beginning of
a tour to the seaports of Marseilles, Bordeaux, Nantes and L'Orient,
which I had long meditated, in hopes that a knowledge of the places and
persons concerned in our commerce, and the information to be got from
them, might enable me sometimes to be useful. I had expected to satisfy
myself, at Marseilles, of the causes of the difference of quality
between the rice of Carolina, and that of Piedmont, which is brought in
quantities to Marseilles. Not being able to do it, I made an excursion
of three weeks into the rice country beyond the Alps, going through it
from Vercelli to Pavia, about sixty miles. I found the difference to
be, not in the management, as had been supposed both here and in
Carolina, but in the species of rice; and I hope to enable them in
Carolina, to begin the cultivation of the Piedmont rice, and carry it
on, hand in hand, with their own, that they may supply both qualities;
which is absolutely necessary at this market. I had before endeavored
to lead the dep√ôt of rice from Cowes to Honfleur, and hope to get it
received there on such terms, as may draw that branch of commerce from
England to this country. It is an object of two hundred and fifty
thousand guineas a year. While passing through the towns of Turin,
Milan and Genoa, I satisfied myself of the practicability of
introducing our whale oil for their consumption, and suppose it would
be equally so, in the other great cities of that country. I was sorry
that I was not authorized to set the matter on foot. The merchants with
whom I chose to ask conferences, met me freely, and communicated fully,
knowing I was in a public character. I could, however, only prepare a
disposition to meet our oil merchants. On the article of tobacco, I was
more in possession of my ground; and put matters into a train for
inducing their government to draw their tobaccos directly from the
United States, and not, as heretofore, from Great Britain. I am now
occupied with the new ministry here, to put the concluding hand to the
new regulations for our commerce with this country, announced in the
letter of Monsieur de Calonnes, which I sent you last fall. I am in
hopes, in addition to those, to obtain a suppression of the duties on
tar, pitch and turpentine, and an extension of the privileges of
American _whale_ oil, to their _fish_ oils in general. I find that the
quantity of cod-fish oil brought to L'Orient, is considerable. This
being got off hand (which will be in a few days) the chicaneries and
vexations of the Farmers on the article of tobacco, and their elusions
of the order of Bernis, call for the next attention. I have reasons to
hope good dispositions in the new ministry towards our commerce with
this country. Besides endeavoring, on all occasions, to multiply the
points of contact and connection with this country, which I consider as
our surest mainstay under every event, I have had it much at heart to
remove from between us every subject of misunderstanding or irritation.
Our debts to the King, to the Officers, and the Farmers, are of this
description. The having complied with no part of our engagements in
these, draws on us a great deal of censure, and occasioned a language
in the Assembl√àe des Notables, very likely to produce dissatisfaction
between us. Dumas being on the spot in Holland, I had asked of him some
time ago, in confidence, his opinion of the practicability of
transferring these debts from France to Holland, and communicated his
answer to Congress, pressing them to get you to go over to Holland, and
try to effect this business. Your knowledge of the ground, and former
successes, occasioned me to take this liberty without consulting you,
because I was sure you would not weigh your personal trouble against
public good. I have had no answer from Congress; but hearing of your
journey to Holland, have hoped that some money operations had led you
there. If it related to the debts of this country, I would ask a
communication of what you think yourself at liberty to communicate, as
it might change the form of my answers to the eternal applications I
receive. The debt to the officers of France carries an interest of
about two thousand guineas, so we may suppose its principal is between
thirty and forty thousand. This makes more noise against us, than all
our other debts put together.

I send you the _Arrets_ which begin the reformation here, and some
other publications respecting America; together with copies of letters
received from O'Bryan and Lambe. It is believed that a naval armament
has been ordered at Brest, in correspondence with that of England. We
know, certainly, that orders are given to form a camp in the
neighborhood of Brabant, and that Count Rochambeau has the command of
it. Its amount, I cannot assert. Report says fifteen thousand men. This
will derange the plans of economy. I take the liberty of putting under
your cover, a letter for Mrs. Kinloch, of South Carolina, with a
packet, and will trouble you to inquire for her, and have them
delivered. The packet is of great consequence, and therefore referred
to her care, as she will know the safe opportunities of conveying it.
Should you not be able to find her, and can forward the packet to its
address, by any very safe conveyance, I will beg you to do it. I have
the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect friendship and
esteem, dear Sir, your most obedient and most humble servant.




TO DAVID HARTLEY.

PARIS, July 2, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I received lately your favor of April the 23d, on my return
from a journey of three or four months; and am always happy in an
occasion of recalling myself to your memory. The most interesting
intelligence from America, is that respecting the late insurrection in
Massachusetts. The cause of this has not been developed to me, to my
perfect satisfaction. The most probable is, that those individuals were
of the imprudent number of those, who have involved themselves in debt
beyond their abilities to pay, and that a vigorous effort in that
government to compel the payment of private debts, and raise money for
public ones, produced the resistance. I believe you may be assured,
that an idea or desire of returning to anything like their ancient
government, never entered into their heads. I am not discouraged by
this. For thus I calculate. An insurrection in one of thirteen States,
in the course of eleven years that they have subsisted, amounts to one
in any particular State, in one hundred and forty-three years, say a
century and a half. This would not be near as many, as have happened in
every other government that has ever existed. So that we shall have the
difference between a light and a heavy government, as clear gain. I
have no fear, but that the result of our experiment will be, that men
may be trusted to govern themselves without a master. Could the
contrary of this be proved, I should conclude, either that there is no
God, or that he is a malevolent being. You have heard of the federal
convention, now sitting at Philadelphia, for the amendment of the
Confederation. Eleven States appointed delegates certainly; it was
expected that Connecticut would also appoint, the moment its Assembly
met. Rhode Island had refused. I expect they will propose several
amendments; that that relative to our commerce will probably be adopted
immediately, but that the others must wait to be adopted, one after
another, in proportion as the minds of the States ripen for them. Dr.
Franklin enjoys good health. I shall always be happy to hear from you,
being with sentiments of very sincere esteem and respect, dear Sir,
your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO BENJAMIN VAUGHAN.

PARIS, July 2, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--Your favor of February the 16th, came to my hands in the
moment I was setting out on a tour through the southern parts of France
and northern of Italy, from which I am but just now returned. I avail
myself of the earliest moment to acknowledge its receipt, and to thank
you for the box of magnets which I found here. Though I do not know
certainly, by, or from whom they come, I presume they came by Colonel
Smith, who was here in my absence, and from Messrs. Nairne and Blunt,
through your good offices. I think your letter of February the 16th,
flatters me with the expectation of another, with observations, on the
hygrometers I had proposed. I value what comes from you too much, not
to remind you of it. Your favor by Mr. Garnett also, came during my
absence. I presume he has left Paris, as I can hear nothing of him. I
have lost the opportunity, therefore, of seeing his method of resisting
friction, as well as of showing, by attentions to him, respect for
yourself and your recommendations. Mr. Paine (Common Sense) is here on
his way to England. He has brought the model of an iron bridge, with
which he supposes a single arch of four hundred feet, may be made. It
has not yet arrived in Paris. Among other projects, with which we begin
to abound in America, is one for finding the latitude by the variation
of the magnetic needle. The author supposes two points, one near each
pole, through the northern of which, pass all the magnetic meridians of
the northern hemisphere, and through the southern, those of the
southern hemisphere. He determines their present position and
periodical revolution. It is said, his publication is plausible. I have
not seen it.

What are you going to do with your naval armament on your side the
channel? Perhaps you will ask me, what they are about to do here? A
British navy and Prussian army hanging over Holland on one side, a
French navy and army hanging over it on the other, looks as if they
thought of fighting. Yet I think both parties too wise for that, too
laudably intent on economizing, rather than on further embarrassing
their finances. May they not propose to have a force on the spot, to
establish some neutral form of a constitution, which these powers will
cook up among themselves, without consulting the parties for whom it is
intended? The affair of Geneva shows such combinations possible.
Wretched, indeed, is the nation in whose affairs foreign powers are
once permitted to intermeddle. Lord Wycombe is with us at present. His
good sense, information and discretion, are much beyond his years, and
promise good things for your country.

I beg you to accept assurances of the esteem and respect with which I
have the honor to be, dear Sir, your most obedient, and most humble
servant.




TO DR. WILLIAM GORDON.

PARIS, July 2, 1787.


SIR,--Being just returned from a tour through the southern parts of
France and northern of Italy, I could not till this moment, acknowledge
the receipt of your obliging letter with the papers accompanying it. It
happened unluckily also that those addressed to the Marquis de La
Fayette, were under my cover. I put them into his hands the moment of
my return. From the opportunities you have had of coming at facts known
as yet to no other historian, from your dispositions to relate them
fairly, and from your known talents, I have sanguine expectations that
your work will be a valuable addition to historical science; and the
more so, as we have little yet on the subject of our war, which merits
respect. I fear, however, that this is not the field from which you are
to expect profit. The translation will sell here; but few read English.
Be assured, that nothing shall be wanting on my part to encourage a
preference of the original to a translation; but it will not be till
the fall that either will be called for, because, during summer, the
readers are in the country. I got from a bookseller here about forty
guineas for a first copy of Dr. Ramsay's work, which he had translated.
If this would be an object with you, I offer you my service. I have the
honor to be, with sentiments of great esteem, Sir, your most obedient,
and most humble servant.




TO T. B. HOLLIS, ESQ.

PARIS, July 2, 1787.


SIR,--On my return from a tour through the southern parts of France and
northern of Italy, I found here the present of books you had been so
kind as to send me. I should value them highly for their intrinsic
merit, but much more as coming from you. You will have seen that one of
our republics has experienced those commotions which the newspapers
have been always ascribing to all of them. I am not satisfied what has
been the cause of this, but the most probable account is, that these
individuals were of those who have so imprudently involved themselves
in debt; and that a vigorous exertion in their government to enforce
the payment of private debts, and raise money for the public ones,
occasioned the insurrection. One insurrection in thirteen States in the
course of eleven years that they have existed, amounts to one in any
individual State in one hundred and forty-three years, say a century
and a half. This will not weigh against the inconveniences of a
government of force, such as are monarchies and aristocracies. You see
I am not discouraged by this little difficulty; nor have I any doubt
that the result of our experiment will be, that men are capable of
governing themselves without a master. I have the honor to be, with
sentiments of the highest esteem and respect, Sir, your most obedient,
and most humble servant.




TO MR. BONDFIELD.

PARIS, July 2, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--Revising the letters and notes in my possession on the
subject of our commerce, I observe you say in your letter of December
12, that we pay alien duties in the ports of France, supposed the
double of what we ought to pay. If by this you mean that we are not on
as favorable a footing as Spain, it would be vain to remonstrate on
that subject. The family compact expressly excluded all other nations
from the advantages the two parties ceded to each other; but if there
be any other nation which enjoys any greater advantages in the ports of
France than we do, I should wish to know it, because, if it be not in
consequence of a particular compensation, I should hope to remove it.
Will you be so good as to explain the matter? and shall I ask the
further favor of you to forward the enclosed letter by the first vessel
going from your port to Virginia. I wish to hear from Mr. Barclay, who,
I suppose, is still with you, and whose service and comfort I have
sincerely at heart. I am, with much esteem and respect, dear Sir, your
most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MR. JAMES MANNY.

PARIS, July 2, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--The reason why the receipt of your favor of May 21, has been
thus unacknowledged, was my absence on a tour round the sea-port towns,
from which I am just returned. In the meantime, the occasion of your
inquiry relative to Mr. Morris' bills has passed; nor could I now
explain the reason of their protest. I understand, however, that they
are since honored. The effect, therefore, will only be to show that
there is a limit even to his credit.

Recent appearances in Europe would seem to threaten war. On one side,
England sending a navy of observation to hover over Holland, and
Prussia an army; this country sending a navy and army to hover over the
other side of the same country; yet it is morally sure that all these
powers desire peace most ardently. It remains to see, then, whether
they mean any more than to arrange a kind of constitution which shall
be merely neutral, and to force it on the United Netherlands, as done
in the case of Geneva. I need not write you American news. You have it
of later date than I have. I shall, therefore, only add assurances of
the esteem and respect with which I am, dear Sir, your friend and
servant.




TO M. L'ABB‚Ä¶ MORELLET.

PARIS, July 2, 1787.


I am sorry, my dear Sir, that your interest should be affected by the
ill behavior of Barrois; but when you consider the facts, you will be
sensible that I could not have indulged his indolence further without
increasing the injury to a more punctual workman. Stockdale, of London,
had asked leave to print my Notes. I agreed to it, and promised he
should have the plate of the map as soon as it should be corrected, and
the copies struck off for you and myself. He thereupon printed his
edition completely in three weeks. The printer, who was to strike off
two hundred and fifty maps for me, kept the plate but five days. It was
then delivered to Barrois, with notice that it could not be left longer
with him than should suffice to strike off his number. Repeated
applications for it by Mr. Short and my servant were only answered by
repeated promises and times of delivery fixed, no one of which was
performed. When I returned, he had been possessed of the plate upwards
of two months. I was astonished and confounded to be told it had not
been sent to Stockdale, and that his edition had been lying dead on his
hands three months. I sent to Barrois the very day of my return, to let
him know, that justice to Stockdale did not permit me to defer sending
him the plate any longer, yet I would wait five days, at the end of
which he must deliver me the plate, whether his maps were done or not.
I received no answer, but waited ten days. I then sent for the plate.
The answer was, he was not at home. I sent again the next day. Answer,
he was not at home. I sent the third day. Not at home. I then ordered
the messenger to go back, and wait till he should come home. This
produced an answer of two lines, _qu'il alloit soigner son ouvrier_? I
wrote him word in return to deliver the plate instantly. This I think
was on Saturday or Sunday. He told the messenger he would let me have
it the Thursday following. I took patience, and sent on the Friday, but
telling the messenger if he refused to deliver it, to inform him I
would be plagued no more with sending messages, but apply to the
police. He then delivered it, and I sent it off immediately to London.
He had kept it three months, of which three weeks were after my return.
I think, Sir, you will be satisfied that justice to Stockdale, justice
to myself who had passed my word for sending on the plate, and
sensibility to the shuffling conduct of Barrois, permitted me to act no
otherwise. But no matter. Let his ill behavior make no odds between you
and me. It will affect your interest, and that suffices to determine me
to order back the plate as soon as Stockdale has done with it. He will
not require more days than Barrois months, so that it will be here
before you can want it. But it must never go into Barrois' hands again,
nor of any person depending on him, or under his orders. The workman
who struck off the two hundred and fifty for me seems to have been
diligent enough. Either he, or any other workman you please of that
description, shall have it to strike what number you wish. I forgot to
observe, in its proper place, that when I was in the midst of my
difficulties, I did myself the honor of calling on you, as well to have
that of asking after your health on my return as of asking your
assistance to obtain the plate. Unluckily you were gone to Versailles,
so I was obliged to proceed as well as I could. It is no excuse for
Barrois to say he could not get his Imprimeur to proceed. He should
have applied to another. But as to you, it shall be set to rights in
the manner I have before stated. Accept my regret that you were in the
hands of so undeserving a workman, and one who placed me under the
necessity of interrupting a work which interested you. Be assured, at
the same time, of the sincerity of those sentiments of esteem and
respect with which I have the honor to be, dear Sir, your most
obedient, and most humble servant.

                        ---------------------

[_The following observations appear to have been addressed to the Count
de Montmorin, about the 6th of July, 1787._]

Observations on the letter of Monsieur de Calonnes to Monsieur
Jefferson, dated Fontainebleau, October 22, 1786.

A committee was appointed, in the course of the last year, to take a
view of the subjects of commerce which might be brought from the United
States of America, in exchange for those of France, and to consider
what advantages and facilities might be offered to encourage that
commerce. The letter of Monsieur de Calonnes was founded on their
report. It was conclusive as to the articles on which satisfactory
information had been then obtained, and reserved, for future
consideration, certain others, needing further inquiry. It is proposed
now to review those unfinished articles, that they may also be
comprehended in the _Arret_, and the regulations on this branch of
commerce, be rendered complete.

1. The letter promised to diminish the "Droits du Roi et d'amiraut√à,"
payable by an American vessel entering into a port of France, and to
reduce what should remain into a single duty, which shall be regulated
by the draught of the vessel, or her number of masts. It is doubted
whether it will be expedient to regulate the duty in either of these
ways. If by the draught of water, it will fall unequally on us as a
nation; because we build our vessels sharp-bottomed, for swift sailing,
so that they draw more water than those of other nations, of the same
burthen. If by the number of masts, it will fall unequally on
individuals; because we often see ships of one hundred and eighty tons,
and brigs of three hundred and sixty. This, then, would produce an
inequality among individuals, of six to one. The present principle is
the most just, to regulate by the burthen. It is certainly desirable,
that these duties should be reduced to a single one. Their names and
numbers perplex and harass the merchant more than their amount; subject
him to imposition, and to the suspicion of it when there is none. An
intention of general reformation in this article, has been accordingly
announced, with augmentation as to foreigners. We are in hopes, that
this augmentation is not to respect us; because it is proposed as a
measure of reciprocity, whereas, in some of our States, no such duties
exist, and in the others, they are extremely light; because we have
been made to hope a diminution, instead of augmentation; and because
this distinction cannot draw on France any just claims from other
nations; the _Jura gentis amicissimc√ä_, conferred by her late treaties,
having reference expressly to the nations of Europe only; and those
conferred by the more ancient ones, not being susceptible of any other
interpretation, nor admitting a pretension of reference to a nation
which did not then exist, and which has come into existence under
circumstances, distinguishing its commerce from that of all other
nations. Merchandise received from them, takes employment from the poor
of France; ours gives it; theirs is brought in the last stage of
manufacture; ours in the first; we bring our tobaccos to be
manufactured into snuff, our flax and hemp into linen and cordage, our
furs into hats, skins into saddlery, shoes and clothing; we take
nothing till it has received the last hand.

2. Fish oils. The Hanseatic treaty was the basis on which the
diminution of duty on this article was asked and granted. It is
expressly referred to as such, in the letter of Monsieur de Calonnes.
Instead, however, of the expression, "huile et graisse de baleine et
d'autres poissons," used in that treaty, the letter uses the terms,
"huiles de baleine, spermaceti, et tout ce qui est compris sous ces
d√ànominations." And the Farmers have availed themselves of this
variation, to refuse the diminution of duty on the oils of the _vache
marine_, _chein de mer_, _esturgeon_, and other fish. It is proposed,
therefore, to re-establish in the _Arret_, the expression of the
Hanseatic treaty, and to add, from the same treaty, the articles
"baleine coup√àe et fanon de baleine."

The letter states these regulations as finally made by the King. The
merchants, on this supposition, entered into speculations. But they
found themselves called on for the old duties, not only on other fish
oils, but on the whale oil. Monsieur de Calonnes always promised that
the _Arret_ should be retrospective to the date of the letter, so as to
refund to them the duties they had thus been obliged to pay. To this,
attention is prayed in forming the _Arret_. His Majesty having been
pleased, as an encouragement to the importation of our fish oils, to
abolish the _Droits de fabrication_, it is presumed that the purpose
announced, of continuing those duties on foreign oils, will not be
extended to us.

3. Rice. The duty on this is only seven and a half deniers the quintal,
or about one-quarter per cent. on its first cost. While this serves to
inform a government of the quantities imported, it cannot discourage
that importation. Nothing further, therefore, is necessary on this
article.

4. Pot-asse. This article is of principal utility to France, in her
bleacheries of linen, glass works, and soap works; and the potash of
America, being made of green wood, is known to be the best in the
world. All duty on it was therefore abolished by the King. But the city
of Rouen levies on it a duty of twenty sols the quintal, which is very
sensible in its price, brings it dearer to the bleacheries near Paris,
to those of Beauvais, Laval, etc., and to the glass works, and
encourages them to give a preference to the potash or soude of other
nations. This is a counteraction of the views of the King, expressed in
the letter, which it is hoped will be prevented.

5. Turpentine, tar and pitch, were not decided on, on the former
occasion. Turpentine (_terebenthine_) pays ten sols the quintal, and
ten sols the livre, making fifteen sols the quintal; which is ten per
cent. on its prime cost. Tar (_goudron brai gras_) pays eight livres
the _leth_ of twelve barrels, and ten sols the livre, amounting to
twenty sols the barrel; which is twelve and a half per cent. on its
prime cost. Pitch (_brai sec_) pays ten sols the quintal, and ten sols
the livre, making fifteen sols the quintal; which is twenty per cent.
on its prime cost. Duties of from ten to twenty per cent. on articles
of heavy carriage, prevent their importation. They eat up all the
profits of the merchant, and often subject him to loss. This has been
much the case with respect to turpentine, tar and pitch, which are
principal articles of remittance for the State of North Carolina. It is
hoped, that it will coincide with the views of government, in making
the present regulations, to suppress the duties on these articles,
which, of all others, can bear them best.




TO T. M. RANDOLPH, JUNIOR.

PARIS, July 6, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--Your favor of April the 14th, came here during my absence on
a journey through the southern parts of France and northern of Italy,
from which I am but lately returned. This cause alone has prevented
your receiving a more early answer to it. I am glad to find, that among
the various branches of science presenting themselves to your mind, you
have fixed on that of politics as your principal pursuit. Your country
will derive from this a more immediate and sensible benefit. She has
much for you to do. For, though we may say with confidence, that the
worst of the American constitutions is better than the best which ever
existed before, in any other country, and that they are wonderfully
perfect for a first essay, yet every human essay must have defects. It
will remain, therefore, to those now coming on the stage of public
affairs, to perfect what has been so well begun by those going off it.
Mathematics, Natural Philosophy, Natural History, Anatomy, Chemistry,
Botany, will become amusements for your hours of relaxation, and
auxiliaries to your principal studies. Precious and delightful ones
they will be. As soon as such a foundation is laid in them, as you may
build on as you please, hereafter, I suppose you will proceed to your
main objects, Politics, Law, Rhetoric, and History. As to these, the
place where you study them is absolutely indifferent. I should except
Rhetoric, a very essential member of them, and which I suppose must be
taught to advantage where you are. You would do well, therefore, to
attend the public exercises in this branch also, and to do it with very
particular diligence. This being done, the question arises, where you
shall fix yourself for studying Politics, Law, and History? I should
not hesitate to decide in favor of France, because you will, at the
same time, be learning to speak the language of that country, become
absolutely essential under our present circumstances. The best method
of doing this, would be to fix yourself in some family where there are
women and children, in Passy, Auteuil, or some other of the little
towns in reach of Paris. The principal hours of the day, you will
attend to your studies, and in those of relaxation, associate with the
family. You will learn to speak better from women and children in three
months, than from men in a year. Such a situation, too, will render
more easy a due attention to economy of time and money. Having pursued
your main studies here, about two years, and acquired a facility in
speaking French, take a tour of four or five months through this
country and Italy, return then to Virginia, and pass a year in
Williamsburg, under the care of Mr. Wythe; and you will be ready to
enter on the public stage, with superior advantages. I have proposed to
you, to carry on the study of the law with that of politics and
history. Every political measure will, forever, have an intimate
connection with the laws of the land; and he, who knows nothing of
these, will always be perplexed, and often foiled by adversaries having
the advantage of that knowledge over him. Besides, it is a source of
infinite comfort to reflect, that under every chance of fortune, we
have a resource in ourselves from which we may be able to derive an
honorable subsistence. I would, therefore, propose not only the study,
but the practice of the law for some time, to possess yourself of the
habit of public speaking. With respect to modern languages, French, as
I have before observed, is indispensable. Next to this, the Spanish is
most important to an American. Our connection with Spain is already
important, and will become daily more so. Besides this, the ancient
part of American history is written chiefly in Spanish. To a person who
would make a point of reading and speaking French and Spanish, I should
doubt the utility of learning Italian. These three languages, being all
degeneracies from the Latin, resemble one another so much, that I doubt
the probability of keeping in the head a distinct knowledge of them
all. I suppose that he who learns them all, will speak a compound of
the three, and neither perfectly. The journey which I propose to you
need not be expensive, and would be very useful. With your talents and
industry, with science, and that steadfast honesty which eternally
pursues right, regardless of consequences, you may promise yourself
everything--but health, without which there is no happiness. An
attention to health, then, should take place of every other object. The
time necessary to secure this by active exercises, should be devoted to
it, in preference to every other pursuit. I know the difficulty with
which a studious man tears himself from his studies, at any given
moment of the day. But his happiness, and that of his family, depend on
it. The most uninformed mind, with a healthy body, is happier than the
wisest valetudinarian. I need not tell you, that if I can be useful to
you in any part of this, or any other plan you shall adopt, you will
make me happy by commanding my services.

Will you be so good, Sir, as to return my most respectful thanks for
the diploma with which I am honored by the society instituted with you,
for the encouragement of the study of Natural History? I am afraid it
will never be in my power to contribute anything to the object of the
institution. Circumstances have thrown me into a very different line of
life, and not choice, as I am happy to find in your case. In the year
1781, while confined to my room by a fall from my horse, I wrote some
Notes, in answer to the inquiries of M. de Marbois, as to the natural
and political state of Virginia. They were hasty and undigested; yet as
some of these touch slightly on some objects of its natural history, I
will take the liberty of asking the society to accept a copy of them.
For the same reason, and because, too, they touch on the political
condition of our country, I will beg leave to present you with a copy,
and ask the favor of you to find a conveyance for them from London to
Edinburgh. They are printed by Stockdale, bookseller, Piccadilly, and
will be ready in three or four weeks from this time. I will direct him
to deliver two copies to your order.

Repeating, constantly, the proffer of my services, I shall only add
assurances of the esteem and attachment with which I am, dear Sir, your
friend and servant.


