
TO EDWARD RUTLEDGE, ESQ.

PARIS, July 14, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I received your favor of the 14th of October in the moment I
was setting out on a tour of the sea port towns of this country, from
which I have been not long returned. I received it, too, with that kind
of heartfelt pleasure which always attends the recollection of ancient
affections. I was glad to find that the adaptation of your rice to this
market was considered worth attention, as I had supposed it. I set out
from hence impressed with the idea the rice-dealers here had given me,
that the difference between your rice and that of Piedmont proceeded
from a difference in the machine for cleaning it. At Marseilles I hoped
to know what the Piedmont machine was; but I could find nobody who knew
anything of it. I determined, therefore, to sift the matter to the
bottom, by crossing the Alps into the rice country. I found their
machine exactly such a one as you had described to me in Congress in
the year 1783. There was but one conclusion then to be drawn, to wit,
that the rice was of a different species, and I determined to take
enough to put you in seed; they informed me, however, that its
exportation in the husk was prohibited, so I could only bring off as
much as my coat and surtout pockets would hold. I took measures with a
muleteer to run a couple of sacks across the Apennines to Genoa, but
have not great dependence on its success. The little, therefore, which
I brought myself, must be relied on for fear we should get no more; and
because, also, it is genuine from Vercilli, where the best is made of
all the Sardinian Lombardy, the whole of which is considered as
producing a better rice than the Milanese. This is assigned as the
reason for the strict prohibition. Piedmont rice sold at Nice, (the
port of its exportation,) when I was there, at seventeen livres French,
the French hundred weight. It varies from time to time as the price of
wheat does with us. The price of Carolina rice at Bordeaux, Nantes,
L'Orient and Havre, varies from sixteen florins to twenty-four florins
the French quintal, which is equal to one hundred and nine pounds our
weight. The best ports to send it to are Bordeaux and Havre, (or Rouen,
which is the same thing as Havre,) but it is essential that it arrive
here a month before the commencement of Lent, when the principal demand
is made for it. Carolina rice, after being sorted here into several
qualities, sells from six sols to ten sols the French pound, retail,
according to the quality. Unsorted and wholesale about thirty florins
the French quintal. Piedmont rice is of but one quality, which sells at
retail at ten sous the French pound, and wholesale is about three or
four livres dearer than yours. In order to induce your countrymen to
ship their rice here directly, I have proposed to some merchants here
to receive consignments, allowing the consigner to draw in the moment
of shipping for as much as he could sell on the spot, and the balance
when it should be sold. But they say this is impossible. They are to
consider and inform me what are the most favorable terms on which they
can receive it. I am told that freight, insurance, and commission are
about four livres the French quintal to a sea-port town. I have written
so long a letter on the subject of rice to Mr. Drayton for the Society
of Agriculture, that I will trouble you with no further particulars,
but refer you to that. Indeed, I am sensible I have written too much on
the subject. Being absolutely ignorant of it myself, it was impossible
for me to know what particulars merited communication. I thought it
best, therefore, to communicate everything. After writing that letter,
I received one from Mr. Izard, by which I found that he had examined
the rice-process in Lombardy. He was so much more capable than myself
of giving the details, that I had at one moment determined to suppress
my letter. However, observing that he considered the rice at Piedmont
to be of the same species with yours, and suspecting myself certainly
that it is not, I determined to hazard my letter and all those
criticisms which fall justly on an ignorant person writing on a subject
to those much more learned in it than himself. A part of my letter,
too, related to the olive tree and caper, the first of which would
surely succeed in your country, and would be an infinite blessing after
some fifteen or twenty years. The caper would also probably succeed,
and would offer a very great and immediate profit. I thank you for your
obliging mention of my worthless Notes on Virginia. Worthless and bad
as they are, they have been rendered more so, as I am told, by a
translation into French. That I may have neither merit nor demerit not
my own, I have consented to their publication in England. I advised the
bookseller to send two hundred copies to Philadelphia, and two hundred
to Richmond, supposing that number might be sold in the United States;
but I do not know whether he will do it. If you will give me leave, I
will send you a copy of the original impression. I congratulate you, my
dear friend, on the law of your State, for suspending the importation
of slaves, and for the glory you have justly acquired by endeavoring to
prevent it forever. This abomination must have an end. And there is a
superior bench reserved in heaven for those who hasten it. The
distractions of Holland thicken apace. They begin to cut one another's
throats heartily. I apprehend the neighboring powers will interfere;
but it is not yet clear whether in concert or by taking opposite sides.
It is a poor contest, whether they shall have one, or many masters.
Your nephew is arrived here in good health. My first interview with him
has impressed me much in his favor. Present me very respectfully to
Mrs. Rutledge, as well as to your brother and his house. Accept
yourself assurances of the sincere esteem and respect with which I am,
dear Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO HIS EXCELLENCY MR. ADAMS.

PARIS, July 17, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I have been duly honored with yours of the 10th instant, and
am happy to hear of the success of your journey to Amsterdam. There can
be no doubt of its ratification by Congress. Would to heaven they would
authorize you to take measures for transferring the debt of this
country to Holland, before you leave Europe. Most especially is it
necessary to get rid of the debt to the officers. Their connections at
Court are such as to excite very unfavorable feelings there against us,
and some very hard things have been said (particularly in the Assembl√àe
des Notables) on the prospect relative to our debts. The payment of the
interest to the officers would have kept them quiet; but there are two
years now due to them. I dare not draw for it without instructions,
because in the instances in which I have hitherto ventured to act
uninstructed, I have never been able to know whether they have been
approved in the private sentiments of the members of Congress, much
less by any vote. I have pressed on them the expediency of transferring
the French debts to Holland, in order to remove everything which may
excite irritations between us and this nation. I wish it may be done
before this ministry may receive ill impressions of us. They are at
present very well disposed. I send you by Mr. Appleton some pamphlets,
and have the honor to be, with sentiments of very cordial esteem, your
affectionate and humble servant.




TO MR. JOSEPH FENWICK.

PARIS, July 21, 1787.


SIR,--I am this moment honored with your letter of the 16th, and wish
it was in my power to give you the information desired on the subject
of tobaccos.

The complaint has been universal that the Farmers General have not
complied with the order of government. I have, therefore, desired that
they may be called on to report precisely what tobacco they have
purchased on the terms prescribed by the order, that if it shall appear
they have not bought the whole quantity, they may be compelled to do it
immediately. It is impossible to foresee whether any new regulations
will be made to take place on the expiration of the contract of Mr.
Morris. I shall certainly press for something to be done by way of
antidote to the monopoly under which this article is placed in France.
The moment anything is decided which may be interesting to our
commerce, I shall take great care to communicate it to them through Mr.
Bondfield; though I do not expect anything interesting to take place
very soon. I am, with much regard, Sir, your most obedient humble
servant.




TO STEPHEN CATHALAN, JUNIOR.

PARIS, July 21, 1787.


SIR,--I received your favor of May the 9th just as I was stepping into
the barge on my departure from Cette; which prevented my answering it
from that place. On my arrival here, I thought I would avail myself of
the opportunity of paying your balance, to make a little acquaintance
with Sir John Lambert. One or two unsuccessful attempts to find him at
home, with the intermediate procrastinations well known to men of
business, prevented my seeing him till yesterday, and have led me on to
this moment, through a perpetual remorse of conscience for not writing
to you, and to the constant belief that it would be to-morrow and
to-morrow. At length, I have seen him, paid him the eighty-five livres
which you have been so kind as to advance for me, and am actually at my
writing-table, returning you thanks for this kindness, and to yourself
and the family for the thousand others I received at their hands, at
Marseilles. My journey, after leaving you, wanted nothing but the
company of Madame Cathalan and yourself, to render it perfectly
agreeable. I felt the want of it peculiarly on the Canal de Languedoc,
where, with society, the mode of travelling would have been charming. I
was much indebted to M. Minaudier for a good equipment from Agde, and
unceasing attentions to that place; for which I was indebted to your
recommendations as well as to his goodness.

I am honored with your father's letter of June the 30th; and, as he
does not read English, and I cannot write French, I must beg leave to
answer him through you. I thank him for his hints on the subject of
tobacco. I am now pressing for arrangements as to that article, to take
place on the expiration of Mr. Morris' contract, and the order of
Bernis. What form this business will take, or what will be the nature
of the arrangements, or whether there will be any, I am as yet unable
to say. I will take care to inform you the moment there is a decision.

The public business with which Mr. Barclay has been charged rendering
it necessary for him to repair to Congress, and the interest of his
creditors, his family and himself requiring his return to America, he
has departed for that country. I know nothing of Mr. Barclay's affairs
in this country. He has good possessions in America, which, he assured
me, were much more than sufficient to satisfy all the demands against
him. He went, determined to convert those immediately into money, and
to collect the debts due to him there, that he might be enabled to pay
his debts. My opinion of his integrity is such, as to leave no doubt in
my mind, that he will do everything in his power to render justice to
his creditors, and I know so well his attachment to M. Cathalan, as to
be satisfied, that if he makes any difference among his creditors, he
will be among the most favored. Mr. Barclay is an honest and honorable
man, and is more goaded towards the payment of his debts by his own
feelings, than by all the processes of law which could be set on foot
against him.

No arrangements having ever been made as yet, for cases like that of
the carpenter of the American ship Sally, I am unable to answer on that
subject. I am in hopes, his money will last till he recovers his
senses, or till we can receive instructions what to do in that and
similar cases.

Mr. Cathalan wishes a copy of my Notes on Virginia. If you will be so
good as to advise me by what channel they will go safely, I will do
myself the honor of sending a copy, either of the original or of the
translation. Present me affectionately to Mrs. Cathalan, the mother and
daughter; tell the latter I feed on the hopes of seeing her one day at
Paris. My friendly respects wait also on your father; and on yourself,
assurances of the esteem and consideration with which I have the honor
to be, dear Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO THE DELEGATES OF RHODE ISLAND.

PARIS, July 22, 1787.


GENTLEMEN,--I was honored, in the month of January last, with a letter
from the honorable the Delegates of Rhode Island in Congress, enclosing
a letter from the corporation of Rhode Island College to his most
Christian Majesty, and some other papers. I was then in the hurry of
preparation for a journey into the south of France, and therefore
unable, at that moment, to make the inquiries which the object of the
letter rendered necessary. As soon as I returned, which was in the last
month, I turned my attention to that object, which was the
establishment of a professorship of the French language in the College,
and the obtaining a collection of the best French authors, with the aid
of the King. That neither the College nor myself might be compromitted
uselessly, I thought it necessary to sound, previously, those who were
able to inform me what would be the success of the application. I was
assured, so as to leave no doubt, that it would not be complied with;
that there had never been an instance of the King's granting such a
demand in a foreign country, and that they would be cautious of setting
the precedent: that, in this moment, too, they were embarrassed with
the difficult operation of putting down all establishments of their
own, which could possibly be dispensed with, in order to bring their
expenditures down to the level of their receipts. Upon such information
I was satisfied, that it was most prudent not to deliver the letter,
and spare to both parties the disagreeableness of giving and receiving
a denial. The King did give to two colleges in America copies of the
works printing in the public press. But were this to be obtained for
the College of Rhode Island, it would extend only to a volume or two of
Buffon's works, still to be printed, Manilius' Astronomicon, and one or
two other works in the press, which are of no consequence. I did not
think this an object for the College, worth being pressed. I beg the
favor of you, gentlemen, to assure the corporation, that no endeavors
of mine should have been spared, could they have effected their wish;
and that they have been faithfully used in making the preliminary
enquiries which are necessary, and which ended in an assurance that
nothing could be done. These papers having been transmitted to me
through your delegation, will, I hope, be an apology for my availing
myself of the same channel, for communicating the result.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem and
respect, Gentlemen, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO THE COUNT DE MONTMORIN.

PARIS, July 23, 1787.


SIR,--I had the honor, a few days ago, of putting into the hands of
your Excellency, some observations on the other articles of American
produce, brought into the ports of this country. That of our tobaccos,
from the particular form of their administration here, and their
importance to the King's revenues, has been placed on a separate line,
and considered separately. I will now ask permission to bring that
subject under your consideration.

The mutual extension of their commerce was among the fairest advantages
to be derived to France and the United States, from the independence of
the latter. An exportation of eighty millions, chiefly in raw
materials, is supposed to constitute the present limits of the commerce
of the United States with the nations of Europe; limits, however, which
extend as their population increases. To draw the best proportion of
this into the ports of France, rather than of any other nation, is
believed to be the wish and interest of both. Of these eighty millions,
thirty are constituted by the single article of tobacco. Could the
whole of this be brought into the ports of France, to satisfy its own
demands, and the residue to be re-vended to other nations, it would be
a powerful link of commercial connection. But we are far from this.
Even her own consumption, supposed to be nine millions, under the
administration of the monopoly to which it is farmed, enters little, as
an article of exchange, into the commerce of the two nations. When this
article was first put into Farm, perhaps it did not injure the
commercial interests of the kingdom; because nothing but British
manufactures were then allowed to be given in return for American
tobaccos. The laying the trade open, then, to all the subjects of
France, could not have relieved her from a payment in money.
Circumstances are changed; yet the old institution remains. The body to
which this monopoly was given, was not mercantile. Their object is to
simplify as much as possible, the administration of their affairs. They
sell for cash; they purchase, therefore, with cash. Their interest,
their principles and their practice, seem opposed to the general
interest of the kingdom, which would require, that this capital article
should be laid open to a free exchange for the productions of this
country. So far does the spirit of simplifying their operations govern
this body, that relinquishing the advantages to be derived from a
competition of sellers, they contracted some time ago with a single
person (Mr. Morris), for three years' supplies of American tobacco, to
be paid for in cash. They obliged themselves too, expressly, to employ
no other person to purchase in America, during that term. In
consequence of this, the mercantile houses of France, concerned in
sending her productions to be exchanged for tobacco, cut off, for three
years, from the hope of selling these tobaccos in France, were of
necessity to abandon that commerce. In consequence of this, too, a
single individual, constituted sole purchaser of so great a proportion
of the tobaccos made, had the price in his own power. A great reduction
in it took place, and that, not only on the quantity he bought, but on
the whole quantity made. The loss to the States producing the article,
did not go to cheapen it for their friends here. Their price was fixed.
What was gained on their consumption, was to enrich the person
purchasing it; the rest, the monopolists and merchants of other
countries. The effect of this operation was vitally felt by every
farmer in America, concerned in the culture of this plant. At the end
of the year, he found he had lost a fourth or a third of his revenue;
the State, the same proportion of its subjects of exchange with other
nations: the manufactures of this country, too, were either not to go
there at all, or go through the channel of a new monopoly, which, freed
from the control of competition in prices and qualities, was not likely
to extend their consumption. It became necessary to relieve the two
countries from the fatal effects of this double monopoly. I had the
honor of addressing a letter, on the 15th day of August, 1785, to his
late excellency, the Count de Vergennes, upon this subject, a copy of
which I do myself the honor herein to enclose. The effectual mode of
relief was to lay the commerce open. But the King's interest was also
to be guarded. A committee was appointed to take this matter into
consideration; and the result was, an order to the Farmers General,
that no such contract should be made again. And to furnish such aliment
as might keep that branch of commerce alive, till the expiration of the
present contract, they were required to put the merchants in general,
on a level with Mr. Morris, for the quantity of twelve or fifteen
thousand hogsheads a year. That this relief, too, might not be
intercepted from the merchants of the two suffering nations by those of
a neighboring one, and that the transportation of so bulky an article
might go to nourish their own shipping, no tobaccos were to be counted
of this purchase, but those brought in French or American vessels. Of
this order, made at Bernis, his Excellency, Count de Vergennes, was
pleased to honor me with a communication, by a letter of the 30th of
May, 1786, desiring that I would publish it as well in America, as to
the American merchants in France. I did so; communicating it to
Congress at the same time. This order, thus viewed with the
transactions which produced it, will be seen to have been necessary;
and its punctual and candid execution has been rendered still more so,
by the speculations of the merchants, entered into on the faith of it.
Otherwise, it would become the instrument of their ruin instead of
their relief. A twelve month has elapsed some time since; and it is
questioned whether the Farmers General have purchased, within that
time, the quantity prescribed, and on the conditions prescribed. It
would be impossible for the merchants to prove the negative; it will be
easy for the Farmers General to show the affirmative, if it exists. I
hope that a branch of commerce of this extent will be thought
interesting enough to both nations, to render it the desire of your
Excellency to require, as I deem it my duty to ask, a report of the
purchases they have made, according to the conditions of the order of
Bernis, specifying, in that report, 1, the quantities purchased; 2, the
prices paid; 3, the dates of the purchase and payment; 4, the flag of
the vessel in which imported; 5, her name; 6, her port of delivery; and
7, the name of the seller. The four first articles make part of the
conditions required by the order of Bernis; the three last may be
necessary for the correction of any errors which should happen to arise
in the report.

But the order of Bernis was never considered but as a temporary relief.
The radical evil will still remain. There will be but one purchaser in
the kingdom, and the hazard of his refusal will damp every mercantile
speculation. It is very much to be desired, that before the expiration
of this order, some measure may be devised, which may bring this great
article into free commerce between the two nations. Had this been
practicable at the time it was put into Farm, that mode of collecting
the revenue would probably never have been adopted; now that it has
become practicable, it seems reasonable to discontinue this mode, and
to substitute some of those practised on other imported articles, on
which a revenue is levied, without absolutely suppressing them in
commerce. If the revenue can be secured, the interests of a few
individuals will hardly be permitted to weigh against those of as many
millions, equally subjects of his Majesty, and against those, too, of a
nation allied to him by all the ties of treaty, of interest and of
affection. The privileges of the most favored nation, have been
mutually exchanged by treaty. But the productions of other nations,
which do not rival those of France, are suffered to be bought and sold
freely within the kingdom. By prohibiting all his Majesty's subjects
from dealing in tobacco, except with a single company, one third of the
exports of the United States are rendered uncommerciable here. This
production is so peculiarly theirs, that its shackles affect no other
nation. A relief from these shackles, will form a memorable epoch in
the commerce of the two nations. It will establish at once a great
basis of exchange, serving like a point of union to draw to it other
members of our commerce. Nature, too, has conveniently assorted our
wants and our superfluities, to each other. Each nation has exactly to
spare, the articles which the other wants. We have a surplus of rice,
tobacco, furs, peltry, potash, lamp oils, timber, which France wants;
she has a surplus of wines, brandies, esculent oils, fruits and
manufactures of all kinds, which we want. The governments have nothing
to do, but _not to hinder_ their merchants from making the exchange.
The difference of language, laws and customs, will be some obstacle for
a time; but the interest of the merchants will surmount them. A more
serious obstacle is our debt to Great Britain. Yet, since the treaty
between this country and that, I should not despair of seeing that debt
paid, in part, with the productions of France, if our produce can
obtain here, a free course of exchange for them. The distant prospect
is still more promising. A century's experience has shown, that we
double our numbers every twenty or twenty-five years. No circumstance
can be foreseen, at this moment, which will lessen our rate of
multiplication for centuries to come. For every article of the
productions and manufactures of this country, then, which can be
introduced into the habit there, the demand will double every twenty or
twenty-five years. And to introduce the habit, we have only to let the
merchants alone. Whether we may descend, by a single step, from the
present state, to that of perfect freedom of commerce in this article,
whether any, and what, intermediate operation may be necessary to
prepare the way to this, what cautions must be observed for the
security of his Majesty's revenue, which we do not wish to impair, will
rest with the wisdom of his ministers, whose knowledge of the subject
will enable them to devise the best plans, and whose patriotism and
justice will dispose them to pursue them. To the friendly dispositions
of your Excellency, of which we have had such early and multiplied
proofs, I take the liberty of committing this subject, particularly
trusting that some method may be devised, of reconciling the collection
of his Majesty's revenues, with the interests of the two nations; and
have the honor of assuring you, of those sincere sentiments of esteem
and respect, with which I am your Excellency's most obedient, and most
humble servant.




TO MR. SKIPWITH.

PARIS, July 28, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--A long journey has prevented me from writing to any of my
friends, for some time past. This was undertaken with a view to benefit
a dislocated and ill-set wrist, by the mineral waters of Aix, in
Provence. Finding this hope vain, I was led from other views to cross
the Alps as far as Turin, Milan, Genoa; to follow the Mediterranean as
far as Cette, the canal of Languedoc, the Garonne, etc., to Paris. A
most pleasing journey it proved; arts and agriculture offering
something new at every step, and often things worth our imitation. But
the accounts from our country give me to believe that we are not in a
condition to hope for the imitation of anything good. All my letters
are filled with details of our extravagance. From these accounts, I
look back to the time of the war as a time of happiness and enjoyment,
when amidst the privation of many things not essential to happiness, we
could not run in debt, because nobody would trust us; when we practised
by necessity the maxim of buying nothing but what we had money in our
pockets to pay for; a maxim which, of all others, lays the broadest
foundation for happiness. I see no remedy to our evils, but an open
course of law. Harsh as it may seem, it would relieve the very patients
who dread it, by stopping the course of their extravagance, before it
renders their affairs entirely desperate. The eternal and bitter
strictures on our conduct which teem in every London paper, and are
copied from them into others, fill me with anxiety on this subject. The
state of things in Europe is rather threatening at this moment. The
innovations of the Emperor in his dominions have excited a spirit of
resistance. His subjects in Brabant and Flanders are arming, and he has
put forty-five thousand troops in motion towards that country. I
believe they will come to blows. The parties in Holland have already
spilt too much blood to be easily stopped. If left to themselves, I
apprehend the Stadtholderians will be too strong; and if foreign powers
interfere, the weight is still on their side. England and Prussia will
be too much for France. As it is certain that neither of these powers
wish for war, and that England and France are particularly averse to
it, perhaps the matter may end in an armed mediation. If the mediators
should not agree, they will draw their negotiations into length, and
trust to the chapter of accidents for their final solution. With
respect to our country, it stands well with the present ministry here.
The non-payment of our debt is against us. We are occupied in procuring
favorable terms of reception for our produce.

Adieu, my dear Sir, and be assured of the sentiments of sincere esteem
of your affectionate friend and servant.




TO J. W. EPPES.

PARIS, July 28, 1787.


DEAR JACK,--The letter which you were so kind as to write to me the 22d
of May, 1786, was not delivered to me till the 3d of May, 1787, when it
found me in the neighborhood of Marseilles. Before that time, you must
have taken your degree, as mentioned in your letter. Those public
testimonies which are earned by merit, and not by solicitation, may
always be accepted without the imputation of vanity. Of this nature is
the degree which your masters proposed to confer on you. I congratulate
you sincerely on it. It will be a pleasing event to yourself; it will
be the same to your parents and friends, and to none more than myself.
Go on deserving applause, and you will be sure to meet with it; and the
way to deserve it is, to be good, and to be industrious. I am sure you
will be good, and hope you will be industrious. As to your future plan,
I am too distant from you to advise you on sure grounds. In general, I
am of opinion, that till the age of about sixteen, we are best employed
on languages; Latin, Greek, French, and Spanish, or such of them as we
can. After this, I think the College of William and Mary the best place
to go through the courses of Mathematics, Natural Philosophy in its
different branches, and Law. Of the languages I have mentioned, I think
Greek the least useful. Write me word, from time to time, how you go
on. I shall always be glad to assist you with any books you may have
occasion for, and you may count with certainty on every service I can
ever render you, as well as on the sincere esteem of, dear Jack, yours
affectionately.




TO ALEXANDER DONALD.

PARIS, July 28, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I received with infinite satisfaction your letter of the 1st
of March; it was the first information I had of your being in America.
There is no person whom I shall see again with more cordial joy,
whenever it shall be my lot to return to my native country; nor any one
whose prosperity in the meantime will be more interesting to me. I
find, as I grow older, that I set a higher value on the intimacies of
my youth, and am more afflicted by whatever loses one of them to me.
Should it be in my power to render any service in your shipment of
tobacco to Havre de Grace, I shall do it with great pleasure. The order
of Bernis has, I believe, been evaded by the Farmers General as much as
possible. At this moment, I receive information from most of the
seaports, that they refuse taking any tobacco, under the pretext that
they have purchased their whole quantity. From Havre I have heard
nothing, and believe you will stand a better chance there than anywhere
else. Being one of the ports of manufacture, too, it is entitled to a
higher price. I have now desired, that the Farmers may make a distinct
return of their purchases, which are conformable to the order of
Bernis. If they have really bought their quantity, _on those terms_, we
must be satisfied; if they have not, I shall propose their being
obliged to make it up instantly. There is a considerable accumulation
of tobacco in the ports.

Among many good qualities which my countrymen possess, some of a
different character unhappily mix themselves. The most remarkable are,
indolence, extravagance, and infidelity to their engagements. Cure the
two first, and the last would disappear, because it is a consequence of
them, and not proceeding from a want of morals. I know of no remedy
against indolence and extravagance, but a free course of justice.
Everything else is merely palliative; but unhappily, the evil has
gained too generally the mass of the nation, to leave the course of
justice unobstructed. The maxim of buying nothing without the money in
our pockets to pay for it, would make of our country one of the
happiest upon earth. Experience during the war proved this; as I think
every man will remember, that under all the privations it obliged him
to submit to, during that period, he slept sounder, and awaked happier
than he can do now. Desperate of finding relief from a free course of
justice, I look forward to the abolition of all credit, as the only
other remedy which can take place. I have seen, therefore, with
pleasure, the exaggerations of our want of faith, with which the London
papers teem. It is indeed, a strong medicine for sensible minds, but it
is a medicine. It will prevent their crediting us abroad, in which case
we cannot be credited at home. I have been much concerned at the losses
produced by the fire of Richmond. I hope you have escaped them. It will
give me much pleasure to hear from you, as often as you can spare a
moment to write. Be assured that nobody entertains for you sentiments
of more perfect and sincere esteem than, dear Sir, your friend and
servant.




TO WILLIAM DRAYTON.

PARIS, July 30, 1787.


SIR,--Having observed that the consumption of rice in this country, and
particularly in this capital, was very great, I thought it my duty to
inform myself from what markets they draw their supplies, in what
proportion from ours, and whether it might not be practicable to
increase that proportion. This city being little concerned in foreign
commerce, it is difficult to obtain information on particular branches
of it in the detail. I addressed myself to the retailers of rice, and
from them received a mixture of truth and error, which I was unable to
sift apart in the first moment. Continuing, however, my inquiries, they
produced at length this result: that the dealers here were in the habit
of selling two qualities of rice, that of Carolina, with which they
were supplied chiefly from England, and that of Piedmont; that the
Carolina rice was long, slender, white and transparent, answers well
when prepared with milk, sugar, &c., but not so well when prepared _au
gras_; that that of Piedmont was shorter, thicker, and less white, but
that it presented its form better when dressed _au gras_, was better
tasted, and, therefore, preferred by good judges for those purposes;
that the consumption of rice, in this form, was much the most
considerable, but that the superior beauty of the Carolina rice,
seducing the eye of those purchasers who are attached to appearances,
the demand for it was upon the whole as great as for that of Piedmont.
They supposed this difference of quality to proceed from a difference
of management; that the Carolina rice was husked with an instrument
that broke it more, and that less pains were taken to separate the
broken from the unbroken grains, imagining that it was the broken
grains which dissolved in oily preparations; that the Carolina rice
costs somewhat less than that of Piedmont; but that being obliged to
sort the whole grains from the broken, in order to satisfy the taste of
their customers, they ask and receive as much for the first quality of
Carolina, when sorted, as for the rice of Piedmont; but the second and
third qualities, obtained by sorting, are sold much cheaper. The
objection to the Carolina rice then, being, that it crumbles in certain
forms of preparation, and this supposed to be the effect of a less
perfect machine for husking, I flattered myself I should be able to
learn what might be the machine of Piedmont, when I should arrive at
Marseilles, to which place I was to go in the course of a tour through
the seaport towns of this country. At Marseilles, however, they
differed as much in account of the machines, as at Paris they had
differed about other circumstances. Some said it was husked between
mill-stones, others between rubbers of wood in the form of mill-stones,
others of cork. They concurred in one fact, however, that the machine
might be seen by me, immediately on crossing the Alps. This would be an
affair of three weeks. I crossed them and went through the rice country
from Vercelli to Pavia, about sixty miles. I found the machine to be
absolutely the same with that used in Carolina, as well as I could
recollect a description which Mr. E. Rutledge had given me of it. It is
on the plan of a powder mill. In some of them, indeed, they arm each
pestle with an iron tooth, consisting of nine spikes hooked together,
which I do not remember in the description of Mr. Rutledge. I therefore
had a tooth made, which I have the honor of forwarding you with this
letter; observing, at the same time, that as many of their machines are
without teeth as with them, and of course, that the advantage is not
very palpable. It seems to follow, then, that the rice of Lombardy (for
though called Piedmont rice, it does not grow in that county but in
Lombardy) is of a different species from that of Carolina; different in
form, in color and in quality. We know that in Asia they have several
distinct species of this grain. Monsieur Poivre, a former Governor of
the Isle of France, in travelling through several countries of Asia,
observed with particular attention the objects of their agriculture,
and he tells us, that in Cochin-China they cultivate six several kinds
of rice, which he describes, three of them requiring water, and three
growing on highlands. The rice of Carolina is said to have come from
Madagascar, and De Poivre tells us, it is the white rice which is
cultivated there. This favors the probability of its being of a
different species originally, from that of Piedmont; and time, culture
and climate may have made it still more different. Under this idea, I
thought it would be well to furnish you with some of the Piedmont rice,
unhusked, but was told it was contrary to the laws to export it in that
form. I took such measures as I could, however, to have a quantity
brought out, and lest these should fail, I brought, myself, a few
pounds. A part of this I have addressed to you by the way of London; a
part comes with this letter; and I shall send another parcel by some
other conveyance, to prevent the danger of miscarriage. Any one of them
arriving safe, may serve to put in seed, should the society think it an
object. This seed too, coming from Vercelli, where the best rice is
supposed to grow, is more to be depended on than what may be sent me
hereafter. There is a rice from the Levant, which is considered as of a
quality still different, and some think it superior to that of
Piedmont. The troubles which have existed in that country for several
years back, have intercepted it from the European market, so that it is
become almost unknown. I procured a bag of it, however, at Marseilles,
and another of the best rice of Lombardy, which are on their way to
this place, and when arrived, I will forward you a quantity of each,
sufficient to enable you to judge of their qualities when prepared for
the table. I have also taken measures to have a quantity of it brought
from the Levant, unhusked. If I succeed, it shall be forwarded in like
manner. I should think it certainly advantageous to cultivate, in
Carolina and Georgia, the two qualities demanded at market; because the
progress of culture, with us, may soon get beyond the demand for the
white rice; and because too, there is often a brisk demand for the one
quality, when the market is glutted with the other. I should hope there
would be no danger of losing the species of white rice, by a confusion
with the other. This would be a real misfortune, as I should not
hesitate to pronounce the white, upon the whole, the most precious of
the two, for us. The dry rice of Cochin-China has the reputation of
being the whitest to the eye, best flavored to the taste, and most
productive. It seems then to unite the good qualities of both the
others known to us. Could it supplant them, it would be a great
happiness, as it would enable us to get rid of those ponds of stagnant
water, so fatal to human health and life. But such is the force of
habit, and caprice of taste, that we could not be sure beforehand it
would produce this effect. The experiment, however, is worth trying,
should it only end in producing a third quality, and increasing the
demand. I will endeavor to procure some to be brought from
Cochin-China. The event, however, will be uncertain and distant.

I was induced, in the course of my journey through the south of France,
to pay very particular attention to the objects of their culture,
because the resemblance of their climate to that of the southern parts
of the United States, authorizes us to presume we may adopt any of
their articles of culture, which we would wish for. We should not wish
for their wines, though they are good and abundant. The culture of the
vine is not desirable in lands capable of producing anything else. It
is a species of gambling, and of desperate gambling too, wherein,
whether you make much or nothing, you are equally ruined. The middling
crop alone is the saving point, and that the seasons seldom hit.
Accordingly, we see much wretchedness among this class of cultivators.
Wine, too, is so cheap in these countries, that a laborer with us,
employed in the culture of any other article, may exchange it for wine,
more and better than he could raise himself. It is a resource for a
country, the whole of whose good soil is otherwise employed, and which
still has some barren spots, and surplus of population to employ on
them. There the vine is good, because it is something in the place of
nothing. It may become a resource to us at a still earlier period; when
the increase of population shall increase our productions beyond the
demand for them, both at home and abroad. Instead of going on to make
an useless surplus of them, we may employ our supernumerary hands on
the vine. But that period is not yet arrived.

The almond tree is also so precarious, that none can depend for
subsistence on its produce, but persons of capital.

The caper, though a more tender plant, is more certain in its produce,
because a mound of earth of the size of a cucumber hill, thrown over
the plant in the fall, protects it effectually against the cold of
winter. When the danger of frost is over in the spring, they uncover
it, and begin its culture. There is a great deal of this in the
neighborhood of Toulon. The plants are set about eight feet apart, and
yield, one year with another, about two pounds of caper each, worth on
the spot sixpence sterling per pound. They require little culture, and
this may be performed either with the plough or hoe. The principal work
is the gathering of the fruit as it forms. Every plant must be picked
every other day, from the last of June till the middle of October. But
this is the work of women and children. This plant does well in any
kind of soil which is dry, or even in walls where there is no soil, and
it lasts the life of a man. Toulon would be the proper port to apply
for them. I must observe, that the preceding details cannot be relied
on with the fullest certainty, because, in the canton where this plant
is cultivated, the inhabitants speak no written language, but a medley,
which I could understand but very imperfectly.

The fig and mulberry are so well known in America, that nothing need be
said of them. Their culture, too, is by women and children, and,
therefore, earnestly to be desired in countries where there are slaves.
In these, the women and children are often employed in labors
disproportioned to their sex and age. By presenting to the master
objects of culture, easier and equally beneficial, all temptation to
misemploy them would be removed, and the lot of this tender part of our
species be much softened. By varying, too, the articles of culture, we
multiply the chances for making something, and disarm the seasons in a
proportionable degree, of their calamitous effects.

The olive is a tree the least known in America, and yet the most worthy
of being known. Of all the gifts of heaven to man, it is next to the
most precious, if it be not the most precious. Perhaps it may claim a
preference even to bread, because there is such an infinitude of
vegetables, which it renders a proper and comfortable nourishment. In
passing the Alps at the Col de Tende, where they are mere masses of
rock, wherever there happens to be a little soil, there are a number of
olive trees, and a village supported by them. Take away these trees,
and the same ground in corn would not support a single family. A pound
of oil, which can be bought for three or four pence sterling, is
equivalent to many pounds of flesh, by the quantity of vegetables it
will prepare, and render fit and comfortable food. Without this tree,
the country of Provence and territory of Genoa would not support
one-half, perhaps not one-third, their present inhabitants. The nature
of the soil is of little consequence if it be dry. The trees are
planted from fifteen to twenty feet apart, and when tolerably good,
will yield fifteen or twenty pounds of oil yearly, one with another.
There are trees which yield much more. They begin to render good crops
at twenty years old, and last till killed by cold, which happens at
some time or other, even in their best positions in France. But they
put out again from their roots. In Italy, I am told, they have trees
two hundred years old. They afford an easy but constant employment
through the year, and require so little nourishment, that if the soil
be fit for any other production, it may be cultivated among the olive
trees without injuring them. The northern limits of this tree are the
mountains of the Cevennes, from about the meridian of Carcassonne to
the Rhone, and from thence, the Alps and Apennines as far as Genoa, I
know, and how much farther I am not informed. The shelter of these
mountains may be considered as equivalent to a degree and a half of
latitude, at least, because westward of the commencement of the
Cevennes, there are no olive trees in 43-1/2‚àû or even 43‚àû of latitude,
whereas, we find them _now_ on the Rhone at Pierrelatte, in 44-1/2‚àû,
and _formerly_ they were at Tains, above the mouth of the Isere, in
45‚àû, sheltered by the near approach of the Cevennes and Alps, which
only leave there a passage for the Rhone. Whether such a shelter exists
or not in the States of South Carolina and Georgia, I know not. But
this we may say, either that it exists or that it is not necessary
there, because we know that they produce the orange in open air; and
wherever the orange will stand at all, experience shows that the olive
will stand well, being a hardier tree. Notwithstanding the great
quantities of oil made in France, they have not enough for their own
consumption, and, therefore, import from other countries. This is an
article, the consumption of which will always keep pace with its
production. Raise it, and it begets its own demand. Little is carried
to America, because Europe has it not to spare. We, therefore, have not
learned the use of it. But cover the southern States with it, and every
man will become a consumer of oil, within whose reach it can be brought
in point of price. If the memory of those persons is held in great
respect in South Carolina who introduced there the culture of rice, a
plant which sows life and death with almost equal hand, what
obligations would be due to him who should introduce the olive tree,
and set the example of its culture! Were the owner of slaves to view it
only as the means of bettering their condition, how much would he
better that by planting one of those trees for every slave he
possessed! Having been myself an eye witness to the blessings which
this tree sheds on the poor, I never had my wishes so kindled for the
introduction of any article of new culture into our own country. South
Carolina and Georgia appear to me to be the States, wherein its
success, in favorable positions at least, could not be doubted, and I
flattered myself it would come within the views of the society for
agriculture to begin the experiments which are to prove its
practicability. Carcassonne is the place from which the plants may be
most certainly and cheaply obtained. They can be sent from thence by
water to Bordeaux, where they may be embarked on vessels bound for
Charleston. There is too little intercourse between Charleston and
Marseilles to propose this as the port of exportation. I offer my
services to the society for the obtaining and forwarding any number of
plants which may be desired.

Before I quit the subject of climates, and the plants adapted to them,
I will add, as a matter of curiosity, and of some utility, too, that my
journey through the southern parts of France, and the territory of
Genoa, but still more the crossing of the Alps, enabled me to form a
scale of the tenderer plants, and to arrange them according to their
different powers of resisting cold. In passing the Alps at the Col de
Tende, we cross three very high mountains successively. In ascending,
we lose these plants, one after another, as we rise, and find them
again in the contrary order as we descend on the other side; and this
is repeated three times. Their order, proceeding from the tenderest to
the hardiest, is as follows: caper, orange, palm, aloe, olive,
pomegranate, walnut, fig, almond. But this must be understood of the
plant only; for as to the fruit, the order is somewhat different. The
caper, for example, is the tenderest plant, yet, being so easily
protected, it is among the most certain in its fruit. The almond, the
hardiest, loses its fruit the oftenest, on account of its forwardness.
The palm, hardier than the caper and orange, never produces perfect
fruit here.

I had the honor of sending you, the last year, some seeds of the sulla
of Malta, or Spanish St. Foin. Lest they should have miscarried, I now
pack with the rice a canister of the same kind of seed, raised by
myself. By Colonel Franks, in the month of February last, I sent a
parcel of acorns of the cork oak, which I desired him to ask the favor
of the Delegates of South Carolina in Congress to forward to you.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem and
respect, Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO FRANCIS HOPKINSON, ESQ.

PARIS, August 1, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--A journey into the southern parts of France and northern of
Italy must apologize to you for the length of time elapsed since my
last, and for the delay of acknowledging the receipt of your favors of
November 8 and December 9, 1786, and April 14, 1787. Your two phials of
essence de l'Orient arrived during that interval, and got separated
from the letters which accompanied them, so that I could not be sure
which was your first preparation, and which was your second. But I
suppose, from some circumstances, that the small phial was the first,
and the larger one the second. This was entirely spoiled, so that
nothing was distinguishable from it. The matter in the small phial was
also too much spoiled for use; but the pearl merchant, from whom I got
my details, said he could judge, from what remained, that it had been
very good; that you had a very considerable knowledge in the manner of
preparing, but that there was still one thing wanting which made the
secret of the art; that this is not only a secret of the art, but of
every individual workman who will not communicate to his fellows,
believing his own method the best; that of ten different workmen, all
will practice different operations, and only one of the ten be the
right one; that the secret consists only in preparing the fish, all the
other parts of the process in the pearl manufactory being known. That
experience has proved it to be absolutely impossible for the matter to
cross the sea without being spoiled; but that if you will send some in
the best state you can, he will make pearls of it, and send to you that
you may judge of them yourself. He says the only possible method of
making anything of it would be for a workman to go over. He would not
engage in this, nor would he buy, because he says it is their custom to
have contracts for nine years' supply from the fishermen, and that his
contract furnishes him with as much as he can sell in the present
declining state of the pearl trade; that they have been long getting
out of fashion, polite people not wearing them at all, and the poor not
able to give a price; that their calling is, in fact, annihilating;
that when he renews his contract he shall be obliged to reduce the
price he pays twenty-five per cent.; that the matter sells from five to
eight livres the French pound, but most generally at six livres. He
showed me a necklace of twelve strands, which used to sell at ten
livres, and now sells for two and a half. He observed that the length
of time the matter will keep depends on the strength of the spirit of
wine. The result is, then, that you must send me a sample of your very
best, and write what you would propose after weighing these
circumstances. The leg and feathers of the bird are also arrived; but
the comb, which you mention as annexed to the foot, has totally
disappeared. I suppose this is the effect of its drying. I have not yet
had an opportunity of giving it to Monsieur de Buffon, but expect to do
it soon. I thank you for the trouble you have taken with Madame
Champne's letters, and must give you another, that of enquiring for
James Lillie, belonging to the privateer General Mercer, of
Philadelphia, the property of Iroon, Carsons and Semple. Richard Graham
& Co., merchants of Philadelphia, seem to have been also interested;
and Isaac Robinson, Graham's son-in-law, to have commanded her. For the
details I refer you to the enclosed paper I received from a Madame
Ferrier, sister to James Lillie, from which you will perceive he has
not been heard of since 1779. I receive many of these applications
which humanity cannot refuse, and I have no means of complying with
them but by troubling gentlemen on the spot. This, I hope, will be my
apology. I am obliged to you for subscribing to the Columbian Magazine
for me. I find it a good thing, and am sure it will be better from the
time you have undertaken it. I wish you had commenced before the month
of December, for then the abominable forgery inserted in my name in the
last page, would never have appeared. This, I suppose, the compilers
took from English papers, those infamous fountains of falsehood. Is it
not surprising that our newswriters continue to copy from those papers,
though every one who knows anything of them, knows they are written by
persons who never go out of their garret nor read a paper? The real
letter alluded to was never meant to have been public, and therefore
was hastily and carelessly dictated while I was obliged to use the pen
of another. It became public, however. I send you a genuine copy to
justify myself in your eyes against the absurd thing they have fathered
upon me in the Magazine. Mr. Payne is here with his bridge, which is
well thought of. The Academy, to whom it is submitted, have not yet
made their report. I have shipped on board the Mary, Captain Howland,
bound from Havre to New York, a box containing the subsequent
livraisons of the Encyclopedie for yourself and Doctor Franklin from
those formerly sent you to the twenty-two inclusive. I think there are
also in it some new volumes of the Bibliotheque physico-√àconomique for
you. I had received duplicates of some books (in sheets) for the
colleges of Philadelphia and Williamsburg. Whether I packed one copy in
your box, and one in Madison's, or both in his, I do not remember. You
will see and be so good as to deliver the one to the College of
Philadelphia, if in your box. The box is directed to Doctor Franklin,
and will be delivered to Mr. Madison at New York. I will send you
either by this occasion or the next, the cost, expenses, etc., etc.
Present me in the most respectful and friendly terms to Dr. Franklin
and his grandson, to Mr. Rittenhouse and family, Mrs. Hopkinson the
elder and younger. My daughter (my elder one I mean, for both are here
now) presents her respects also to your mother. I am, with sentiments
of sincere affection, dear Sir, your friend and servant.




TO RALPH IZARD, ESQ.

PARIS, August 1, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I am to thank you for the laws and newspapers sent me by the
M. de Chateaufort. Your favor of April 4th, has also been duly
received. I am happy to find that the idea of diverting the rice trade
from England to France is thought to be impracticable. A journey which
I made from Marseilles lately, in Lombardy, in order to acquire
information relative to their rice, has corrected the misinformation
which the retailers of rice in this capital had given me. I am
satisfied that the rice of Lombardy is of a different species from
yours. The exportation of it in the husk being prohibited, I could not
bring with me but as much as my pockets would hold, which I have sent
to your society of agriculture. It may serve to raise seed from. I have
taken measures for a couple of sacks, but I do not make sure of them,
nor rely so much on their quality as on the parcel I brought myself. I
have written so fully on this subject to Mr. Drayton, that, without
repeating it here, I will take the liberty of referring you to that
letter. I have endeavored to prevail upon the merchants in this country
to engage in the rice trade. I enclose you the proposals of Messrs.
Berard & Co., for that effect. They are a very solid house. One of them
resides here. Their principal establishment is at L'Orient, where they
would prefer receiving consignments of rice; but they will receive them
anywhere else, and should suppose Honfleur the best port, and next to
that Bordeaux. You observe they will answer bills to the amount of
twelve or fifteen livres the French quintal, if accompanying the bill
of lading, and will pay the surplus of the proceeds as soon as
received. If they sell at Havre or Rouen, they may receive ready money,
and of course pay the balance soon; if they sell at Paris, it must be
on a year's credit (because this will be to the retailers). The money,
therefore, will be received later, but it will be at least six livres
the quintal more; a difference well worth waiting for. I know of no
mercantile house in France of surer bottom.

Affairs in Europe seem to threaten war. Yet I think all may be settled
without it. The Emperor disapproves of the concessions made to the
Netherlands by their governors, but called for deputies to consult on
the matter. They have sent deputies without power to yield a jot, and
go on arming. From the character of their Sovereign, it is probable he
will avail himself of this deputation to concede their demands. The
affairs of Holland are so thoroughly embroiled, that they would
certainly produce a war if France and England were in a condition for
it. But they are not, and they will, therefore, find out some
arrangement either perpetual or temporary to stop the progress of the
civil war begun in that country. A spirit of distrust in the government
here, and confidence in their own force and rights, is pervading all
ranks. It will be well if it awaits the good which will be worked by
the provincial assemblies, and will content itself with that. The
parliament demand an assembly of the States; they are supported by the
ministers of the nation, and the object of asking that assembly is to
fix a constitution, and to limit expenses. They refuse to register any
edict for a new tax. This has so far lessened the credit of government,
that the purse of the money lender is shut. They speak here as freely
as Junius wrote. Yet it is possible that in the event of war, the
spirit of the nation would rise to support a cause which is approved--I
mean that of Holland.

I have had the Messrs. Le Coulteux sounded on the subject of lending
money. I had before tried the same thing with others. But nothing is to
be obtained for persons on our side the water. They have no confidence
in our laws. Besides, all the money men are playing deeply in the
stocks of the country. The spirit of "_agiotage_" (as they call it) was
never so high in any country before. It will probably produce as total
deprivation of morals as the system of law did. All the money of France
is now employed in this, none being free even for the purposes of
commerce, which suffers immensely from this cause.

Before I conclude, I must add, on the subject of rice, that, what
cannot arrive here a month before the car√çme, would miss its sale, and
must therefore go to another market. The merchant, however, to whom it
is consigned, will be competent to this measure whenever he finds it a
necessary one. I beg leave to be presented very respectfully to Mrs.
Izard and your family, and to assure you of the sincere sentiments of
esteem and attachment with which I am, dear Sir, your friend and
servant.





TO JAMES MADISON.

PARIS, August 2, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--My last was of June the 20th. Yours, received since that
date, are of May the 15th, and June the 6th. In mine I acknowledged the
receipt of the paccan nuts which came sealed up. I have reason to
believe those in the box have arrived at L'Orient. By the Mary, Captain
Howland, lately sailed from Havre to New York, I shipped three boxes of
books, one marked J. M. for yourself, one marked B. F. for Dr.
Franklin, and one marked W. H. for William Hay in Richmond. I have
taken the liberty of addressing them all to you, as you will see by the
enclosed bill of lading, in hopes you would be so good as to forward
the other two. You will have opportunities of calling on the gentlemen
for the freight, etc. In yours you will find the books noted in the
account, inclosed herewith. You have now Mabby's works complete, except
that on Poland, which I have never been able to get, but shall not
cease to search for. Some other volumes are wanting, too, to complete
your collection of Chronologies. The fourth volume of D'Albon was lost
by the bookbinder, and I have not yet been able to get one to replace
it. I shall continue to try. The M√àmoires sur les droits et impositions
en Europe, (cited by Smith,) was a scarce and excessively dear book.
They are now reprinting it. I think it will be in three or four
quartos, of from nine to twelve livres a volume. When it is finished, I
shall take a copy for you. Amelot's travels into China, I can learn
nothing of. I put among the books sent you two somewhat voluminous, and
the object of which will need explanation; these are the Tableau de
Paris and L'espion Anglois. The former is truly a picture of private
manners in Paris, but presented on the dark side, and a little darkened
moreover. But there is so much truth in its groundwork, that it will be
well worth your reading. You will then know Paris (and probably the
other large cities of Europe) as well as if you had been there for
years. L'espion Anglois is no caricature. It will give you a just idea
of the wheels by which the machine of government is worked here. There
are in it also many interesting details of the last war, which, in
general, may be relied on. It may be considered as the small history of
great events. I am in hopes, when you shall have read them, you will
not think I have misspent your money for them. My method for making out
this assortment was, to revise the list of my own purchases since the
invoice of 1785, and to select such as I had found worth your having.
Besides this, I have casually met with and purchased some few curious
and cheap things.

I must trouble you on behalf of a Mr. Thomas Burke, at Loughburke, near
Loughrea, in Ireland, whose brother, James Burke, is supposed to have
died in 1785, on his passage from Jamaica, or St. Eustatius to New
York. His property on board the vessel is understood to have come to
the hands of alderman Groom at New York. The enclosed copy of a letter
to him, will more fully explain it. A particular friend of mine here
applies to me for information, which I must ask the favor of you to
procure, and forward to me.

Writing news to others, much pressed in time, and making this letter
one of private business, I did not intend to have said anything to you
on political subjects. But I must press one subject. Mr. Adams informs
me he has borrowed money in Holland, which, if confirmed by Congress,
will enable them to pay, not only the interest due here to the foreign
officers, but the principal. Let me beseech you to reflect on the
expediency of transferring this debt to Holland. All our other debts in
Europe do not injure our reputation so much as this. These gentlemen
have connections both in and out of office, and these again their
connections, so that our default on this article is further known, more
blamed, and excites worst dispositions against us, than you can
conceive. If you think as I do, pray try to procure an order for paying
off their capital. Mr. Adams adds, that if any certain tax is provided
for the payment of interest, Congress may borrow enough in Holland to
pay off their whole debts in France, both public and private, to the
crown, to the Farmers, and to Beaumarchais. Surely it will be better to
transfer these debts to Holland. So critical is the state of that
country, that I imagine the moneyed men of it would be glad to place
their money in foreign countries, and that Mr. Adams could borrow there
for us, without a certain tax for the interest, and saving our faith
too, by previous explanations on that subject. This country is really
supposed on the eve of a * * * *. Such a spirit has risen within a few
weeks, as could not have been believed. They see the great deficit in
their revenues, and the hopes of economy lessen daily. The parliament
refuse to register any act for a new tax, and require an Assembly of
the States. The object of this Assembly is evidently to give law to the
King, to fix a constitution, to limit expenses. These views are said to
gain upon the nation.[4]

                 *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

      [4] The parts of this letter marked by asterisks, are in cypher
      and unintelligible.

A final decision of some sort should be made on Beaumarchais' affairs.

I am, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem, dear Sir, your friend
and servant.




TO THOMAS BARCLAY.

PARIS, August 3, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I am now to acknowledge the receipt of your several favors
of June the 29th, and July the 6th and 8th.

I am of opinion that the affair of Geraud and Roland in Holland had
better be committed to Mr. Dumas in Holland, as lawsuits must be always
attended to by some person on the spot. For the same reason, I think
that of La Vayse and Puchilberg should be managed by the agent at
L'Orient, and Gruel's by the agent at Nantes. I shall always be ready
to assist the agents of L'Orient and Nantes in any way in my power; but
were the details to be left to me, they would languish necessarily, on
account of my distance from the place, and perhaps suffer too, for want
of verbal consultations with the lawyers entrusted with them. You are
now with Congress, and can take their orders on the subject. I shall,
therefore, do nothing in these matters, in reliance that you will put
them into such channel as they direct, furnishing the necessary
documents and explanations.

                 *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

With respect to the French affair, being perfectly satisfied myself, I
have not ceased, nor shall I cease, endeavoring to satisfy others, that
your conduct has been that of an honest and honorable debtor, and
theirs the counterpart of Shylock in the play. I enclose you a letter
containing my testimony on your general conduct, which I have written
to relieve a debt of justice pressing on my mind, well knowing, at the
same time, you will not stand in need of it in America. Your conduct is
too well known to Congress, your character to all the world, to need
any testimonials.

The moment I close my despatches for the packet, which will be the 9th
instant, I shall, with great pleasure, go to pay my respects to Mrs.
Barclay at St. Germains, to satisfy her on the subject of your
transactions, and to assure her that my resources shall be hers, as
long as I have any. A multitude of letters to write, prevents my
entering into the field of public news, further than to observe, that
it is extremely doubtful whether the affairs of Holland will, or will
not produce a war between France, on one side, and England and Prussia,
on the other.

I beg you to accept assurances of the sincere esteem and respect with
which I have the honor to be, dear Sir, your friend and servant.




TO MR. BARCLAY.

PARIS, August 3, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--As you have acted since my arrival in France, in the
characters of Consul-General for that country, and Minister to the
Court of Morocco, and also as agent in some particular transactions for
the State of Virginia, I think it is a duty to yourself, to truth, and
to justice, on your departure for America, to declare that, in all
these characters, as far as has come within my notice, you have acted
with judgment, with attention, with integrity and honor. I beg you to
accept this feeble tribute to truth, and assurances of sincere
attachment and friendship from, dear Sir, your most obedient, and most
humble servant.




TO HIS EXCELLENCY EDWARD RANDOLPH.

PARIS, August 3, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--A journey into the southern parts of France, and northern of
Italy, has prevented my sooner acknowledging the receipt of your
private favors of July 12th, 1786, and January 28 and May 3, 1787. I am
anxious to hear what you have done in your federal convention. I am in
hopes at least you will persuade the States to commit their commercial
arrangements to Congress, and to enable them to pay their debts,
interest and capital. The coercive powers supposed to be wanting in the
federal head, I am of opinion they possess by the law of nature, which
authorizes one party to an agreement to compel the other to
performance. A delinquent State makes itself a party against the rest
of the confederacy.

We have at present two fires kindled in Europe; 1, in Brabant. The
Emperor, the moment of his return to Vienna, disavowed the concessions
which had been made by his governors to quiet the Brabantines. They
prepared, therefore, for regular resistance. But as the Emperor had, at
the same time, called for deputies to be sent to Vienna to consult on
their affairs, they have sent them, but without power to conclude
anything, and in the meantime they go on arming. The enterprising,
unpersevering, capricious, Thrasonic character of their Sovereign
renders it probable he will avail himself of this little condescendence
in the Brabantines to recede from all his innovations. 2. The Dutch are
every now and then cutting one another's throats. The party of the
Stadtholder is strongest within the confederacy, and is gaining ground.
He has a majority in the States General, and a strong party in the
States of Holland. His want of money is supplied by his cousin George.
England and Prussia abet his usurpations, and France the patriotic
party. Were England and France in a condition to go to war, there is no
question but they would have been at it before now. But their
insuperable poverty renders it probable they will compel a suspension
of hostilities, and either arrange and force a settlement on the Dutch,
or if they cannot agree themselves on this, they will try to protract
things by negotiation. Can I be useful to you here in anything in the
purchase of books, of wines, of fruits, of modes for Mrs. Randolph, or
anything else? As to books, they are cheaper here than in England,
excepting those in Latin, Greek, or English. As to wines, I have the
best Vignerons of Bordeaux, Burgundy and Frontinan. Genuine wines can
never be had but of the Vigneron. The best of Bordeaux cost three
livres the bottle, but good may be bought for two. Command me freely,
assured that I shall serve you cheerfully, and that I am with respects
to Mrs. Randolph and attachment to yourself, dear Sir, your most
obedient, and most humble servant.




TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR OF VIRGINIA.

PARIS, August 3, 1787.


SIR,--I am to acknowledge the receipt of your Excellency's letters of
January 28th, and May 4th, which have come to hand since the date of
mine of February 7th. Immediately on the receipt of the former I caused
enquiry to be made relative to the bayonets, and found that they had
certainly been packed with the muskets. Your Excellency's favor of May
4th renders unnecessary the sending the proofs. There have been shipped
in the whole from Bordeaux 3,400 stand of arms, and from Havre 3,406
cartouch boxes, which I hope have come safely to hand. Besides these
there has been a shipment from Bordeaux of powder, etc., made by Mr.
Barclay. This was but the half of what was intended, and of what Mr.
Barclay had contracted for. But his bill on Mr. Grand was protested on
a misconception of Mr. Grand's, who, by a mixture of your account with
that of the United States, had supposed he had but about 12,000 livres
of your money in his hands. I was absent on a journey, and happened in
the course of that to meet with Mr. Barclay at Bordeaux, and we
concluded to send you half the quantity. Since my return, I have not
been able to have your account exactly settled so as to render it now;
but am able to say in general and with certainty, that everything sent
you has been paid, and that after paying Houdon 3,000 livres for the
second bust of the Marquis de La Fayette now nearly ready to be sent
off for you, and 10,000 livres the second payment due towards General
Washington's statue, there will remain enough in Mr. Grand's hands to
pay for a quantity of powder, &c, equal to that sent you by Mr. Barclay
from Bordeaux, which shall accordingly be done. This balance on hand
includes 5,300 livres paid by Mr. Littlepage, which, though he has sent
us a bill for, six or eight months ago, we had refused to receive till
the arrival of your Excellency's letter informing me it had not been
paid in America; it was therefore applied for and received by Mr. Grand
a few days ago. Mr. Barclay drew on me for the balance of his account
with the State of Virginia, 2,370 livres, which I paid; besides these
he afterwards discovered an omission of 108_l._ 8_s._ in his account,
which I pay also, so as to leave your account with him balanced. There
is, however, the articles of expenses for young Mercier, which he has
neither entered in your account, nor charged to me in my private
account. It yet remains due to him, therefore, and I shall pay it to
him if he applies to me. I should have called for it, but that he was
gone to America before I discovered the omission. Should the State have
further occasion for arms, your Excellency will be able to judge,
combining quality and price, whether those of Liege or of France are to
be preferred. I shall with cheerfulness obey your future orders on this
or any other account, and have the honor to be, with sentiments of the
most perfect esteem and respect, your Excellency's most obedient, and
most humble servant.

P. S.--The original of the report on the inauguration of the bust of
the Marquis de La Fayette accompanies this.




TO WILLIAM HAY.

PARIS, August 4, 1787.


SIR,--I am now to acknowledge the receipt of your two favors of April
26, and May 3. I have forwarded, by a vessel lately sailed from Havre
to New York, a box marked W. H., containing the livraisons of the
Encyclop√àdie subsequent to those Dr. Currie has delivered you, to the
22d inclusive. They are sent to the care of Mr. Madison at Congress,
who will forward the box to you. There is in it, also, the same
livraisons to Colonel Monroe. I will continue to forward them once or
twice a year, as they come out. I have stated in a letter to Dr. Currie
the cost and expenses of the first twenty-two livraisons, to enable
yourself and himself to settle. The future shall be charged to you or
him, as your agreement shall be. It is really a most valuable work, and
almost supplies the place of a library.

I receive from too many quarters the account of the distresses of my
countrymen to doubt their truth--distresses brought on themselves by a
feebleness of mind which calculates very illy its own happiness. It is
a miserable arithmetic which makes any single privation whatever so
painful as a total privation of everything which must necessarily
follow the living so far beyond our income. What is to extricate us I
know not, whether law, or loss of credit. If the sources of the former
are corrupted, so as to prevent justice the latter must supply its
place, leave us possessed of our infamous gains, but prevent all future
ones of the same character.

Europe is in a moment of crisis. The innovations by their sovereign in
the Austrian Netherlands have produced in the people a determination to
resist. The Emperor, by disavowing the concessions made by his
governors to quiet the people, seemed to take up the gauntlet which
they had thrown. Yet it is rather probable he will recede, and all be
hushed up there. The Dutch parties are in a course of hostilities which
it will be difficult to suspend. A war would have been begun before
this, between this country on one side, and England and Prussia on the
other, had the parties been in a condition for war. Perhaps England
might have raised supplies, but it would be on a certainty of being
crushed under them. This country would find greater difficulty. There
is, however, a difference in her favor which might reduce her on a
level with England: that is, that it would be a popular war here, and
an unpopular one in England. Probably the weakness of the two countries
will induce them to join in compelling a suspension of hostilities, and
to make an arrangement for them, or if they cannot agree in that, they
will spin the matter into length by negotiation. In fact, though both
parties are arming, I do not expect any speedy commencement of
hostilities. I am, with very great respect and esteem, Sir, your most
obedient, and most humble servant.




TO DR. DAVID RAMSAY.

PARIS, August 4, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I have to acknowledge the receipt of your favors of November
8 and April 7, and the pleasure to inform you that the translation of
your book sells well, and is universally approved. Froulle will send
you some copies of it, by the first opportunity. I am happy to hear you
are occupied on the general history. It is a subject worthy your pen. I
observe Stockdale in London has printed your work and advertised it for
sale. Since I wrote to you on the subject of rice, I have had an
opportunity of examining the rice-fields of Lombardy, and having
committed my observations to writing, in a letter to Mr. Drayton, as
President of the Agricultural Society, I will take the liberty of
referring you to that letter, in which probably there is little new to
your countrymen, though all was new to me. However, if there be a
little new and useful, it will be my reward. I have been pressing on
the merchants here the expediency of enticing the rice-trade to
Bordeaux and Honfleur. At length, I have received the enclosed
propositions. They are a firm and very solid house. I wish they may
produce the effect desired. I have enclosed a copy to Mr. Izard, but
forgot to mention to him, on the subject of white plains and hoes
(particularly named in his letter to me), that this house will begin by
furnishing them from England, which they think they can do as cheap as
you can receive them directly from England. The allowance made to
wholesale purchasers will countervail the double voyage. They hope that
after a while they can have them imitated here. Will you be so good as
to mention this to Mr. Izard? I fear that my zeal will make me expose
myself to ridicule in this business, for I am no merchant, and still
less knowing in the culture of rice. But this risk becomes a duty by
the bare possibility of doing good. You mention in your letter, your
instalment law as needing apology. I have never heard the payment by
instalment complained of in Europe. On the contrary, in the conferences
Mr. Adams and myself had with merchants in London, they admitted the
necessity of them. It is only necessary that the terms be faithfully
observed, and the payments be in real money. I am sensible that there
are defects in our federal government, yet they are so much lighter
than those of monarchies, that I view them with much indulgence. I
rely, too, on the good sense of the people for remedy, whereas the
evils of monarchical government are beyond remedy. If any of our
countrymen wish for a King, give them ‚àÜsop's fable of the frogs who
asked a King; if this does not cure them, send them to Europe. They
will go back good republicans. Whether we shall have war or not, is
still doubtful. I conclude we shall not, from, the inability of both
France and England to undertake a war. But our friend George is rather
remarkable for doing exactly what he ought not to do. He may,
therefore, force on a war in favor of his cousin of Holland. I am, with
very great esteem, Sir, your most obedient humble servant.




TO EDWARD CARRINGTON.

PARIS, August 4, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--Since mine of the 16th of January, I have been honored by
your favors of April the 24th and June the 9th. I am happy to find that
the States have come so generally into the schemes of the federal
convention, from which, I am sure, we shall see wise propositions. I
confess, I do not go as far in the reforms thought necessary, as some
of my correspondents in America; but if the convention should adopt
such propositions, I shall suppose them necessary. My general plan
would be, to make the States one as to everything connected with
foreign nations, and several as to everything purely domestic. But with
all the imperfections of our present government, it is without
comparison the best existing, or that ever did exist. Its greatest
defect is the imperfect manner in which matters of commerce have been
provided for. It has been so often said, as to be generally believed,
that Congress have no power by the Confederation to enforce anything;
for example, contributions of money. It was not necessary to give them
that power expressly; they have it by the law of nature. When two
parties make a compact, there results to each a power of compelling the
other to execute it. Compulsion was never so easy as in our case, where
a single frigate would soon levy on the commerce of any State the
deficiency of its contributions; nor more safe than in the hands of
Congress, which has always shown that it would wait, as it ought to do,
to the last extremities, before it would execute any of its powers
which are disagreeable. I think it very material, to separate, in the
hands of Congress, the executive and legislative powers, as the
judiciary already are, in some degree. This, I hope, will be done. The
want of it has been the source of more evil than we have experienced
from any other cause. Nothing is so embarrassing nor so mischievous, in
a great assembly, as the details of execution. The smallest trifle of
that kind occupies as long as the most important act of legislation,
and takes place of everything else. Let any man recollect, or look
over, the files of Congress; he will observe the most important
propositions hanging over, from week to week, and month to month, till
the occasions have passed them, and the things never done. I have ever
viewed the executive details as the greatest cause of evil to us,
because they in fact place us as if we had no federal head, by
diverting the attention of that head from great to small subjects; and
should this division of power not be recommended by the convention, it
is my opinion Congress should make itself, by establishing an executive
committee.

                 *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

I have the honor to be, with sincere esteem and respect, dear Sir, your
most obedient, most humble servant.




TO DR. JAMES CURRIE.

PARIS, August 4, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I am favored with your letter of May the 2d, and most
cordially sympathise in your late immediate losses. It is a situation
in which a man needs the aid of all his wisdom and philosophy. But as
it is better to turn from the contemplation of our misfortunes to the
resources we possess of extricating ourselves, you will, of course,
have found solace in your vigor of mind, health of body, talents,
habits of business, in the consideration that you have time yet to
retrieve everything, and a knowledge that the very activity necessary
for this, is a state of greater happiness than the unoccupied one, to
which you had a thought of retiring. I wish the bulk of my extravagant
countrymen had as good prospects and resources as you. But with many of
them, a feebleness of mind makes them afraid to probe the true state of
their affairs, and procrastinate the reformation which alone can save
something, to those who may yet be saved. How happy a people were we
during the war, from the single circumstance that we could not run in
debt! This counteracted all the inconveniences we felt, as the present
facility of ruining ourselves overweighs all the blessings of peace. I
know no condition happier than that of a Virginia farmer might be,
conducting himself as he did during the war. His estate supplies a good
table, clothes himself and his family with their ordinary apparel,
furnishes a small surplus to buy salt, sugar, coffee, and a little
finery for his wife and daughters, enables him to receive and to visit
his friends, and furnishes him pleasing and healthy occupation. To
secure all this, he needs but one act of self-denial, to put off buying
anything till he has the money to pay for it. Mr. Ammonett did not
come. He wrote to me, however, and I am making inquiry for the town and
family he indicated. As yet, neither can be heard of, and were they to
be found, the length of time would probably bar all claims against
them. I have seen no object present so many desperate faces. However,
if inquiry can lighten our way, that shall not be wanting, and I will
write to him as soon as we discover anything, or despair of
discovering. Littlepage has succeeded well in Poland. He has some
office, it is said, worth five hundred guineas a year. The box of seeds
you were so kind as to forward me came safe to hand. The arrival of my
daughter, in good health, has been a source of immense comfort to me.
The injury of which you had heard, was a dislocated wrist, and though
it happened eleven months ago, was a simple dislocation, and
immediately aided by the best surgeon in Paris, it is neither well, nor
ever will be, so as to render me much service. The fingers remain
swelled and crooked, the hand withered, and the joint having a very
confined motion. You ask me when I shall return? My commission expires
next spring, and if not renewed, I shall return then. If renewed, I
shall stay somewhat longer; how much, will not depend on me altogether.
So far as it does, I cannot fix the epoch of my return, though I always
flatter myself it is not very distant. My habits are formed to those of
my own country. I am past the time of changing them, and am, therefore,
less happy anywhere else than there.

I shall always be happy to hear from you, being with very sincere
esteem, dear Sir, your friend and servant.




TO MR. BENJAMIN HAWKINS.

PARIS, August 4, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I have to acknowledge the receipt of your favors of March
the 8th and June the 9th, and to give you many thanks for the trouble
you have taken with the dionasa muscipula. I have not yet heard
anything of them, which makes me fear they have perished by the way. I
believe the most effectual means of conveying them hither, will be by
the seed. I must add my thanks, too, for the vocabularies. This is an
object I mean to pursue, as I am persuaded that the only method of
investigating the filiation of the Indian nations is by that of their
languages.

I look up with you to the federal convention for an amendment of our
federal affairs. Yet I do not view them in so disadvantageous a light
at present, as some do. And above all things, I am astonished at some
people's considering a kingly government as a refuge. Advise such to
read the fable of the frogs who solicited Jupiter for a king. If that
does not put them to rights, send them to Europe, to see something of
the trappings of monarchy, and I will undertake that every man shall go
back thoroughly cured. If all the evils which can arise among us, from
the republican form of government, from this day to the day of
judgment, could be put into a scale against what this country suffers
from its monarchical form in a week, or England in a month, the latter
would preponderate. Consider the contents of the Red book in England,
or the Almanac royale of France, and say what a people gain by
monarchy. No race of kings has ever presented above one man of common
sense in twenty generations. The best they can do is, to leave things
to their ministers; and what are their ministers, but a committee,
badly chosen? If the king ever meddles, it is to do harm. Adieu, my
dear Sir, and be assured of the esteem of your friend and servant.




TO COLONEL MONROE.

PARIS, August 5, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--A journey of between three and four months, into the
southern parts of France and northern of Italy, has prevented my
writing to you. In the meantime, you have changed your ground, and
engaged in different occupations, so that I know not whether the news
of this side the water will even amuse you. However, it is all I have
for you. The storm which seemed to be raised suddenly in Brabant, will
probably blow over. The Emperor, on his return to Vienna, pretended to
revoke all the concessions which had been made by his Governors
General, to his Brabantine subjects; but he, at the same time, called
for deputies from among them to consult with. He will use their agency
to draw himself out of the scrape, and all there, I think, will be
quieted. Hostilities go on occasionally in Holland. France espouses the
cause of the Patriots, as you know, and England and Prussia that of the
Stadtholder. France and England are both unwilling to bring on war, but
a hasty move of the King of Prussia will perplex them. He has thought
the stopping his sister sufficient cause for sacrificing a hundred or
two thousand of his subjects, and as many Hollanders and French. He has
therefore ordered twenty thousand men to march, without consulting
England, or even his own ministers. He may thus drag England into a
war, and of course this country, against their will. But it is certain
they will do everything they can to prevent it; and that in this at
least they agree. Though such a war might be gainful to us, yet it is
much to be deprecated by us at this time. In all probability, France
would be unequal to such a war by sea and by land, and it is not our
interest, or even safe for us, that she should be weakened. The great
improvements in their constitution, effected by the Assembl√àe des
Notables, you are apprized of. That of partitioning the country into a
number of subordinate governments, under the administration of
Provincial Assemblies, chosen by the people, is a capital one. But to
the delirium of joy which these improvements gave the nation, a strange
reverse of temper has suddenly succeeded. The deficiencies of their
revenue were exposed, and they were frightful. Yet there was an
appearance of intention to economise, and reduce the expenses of
government. But expenses are still very inconsiderately incurred, and
all reformation in that point despaired of. The public credit is
affected; and such a spirit of discontent has arisen, as has never been
seen. The parliament refused to register the edict for a stamp tax, or
any other tax, and call for the States General, who alone, they say,
can impose a new tax, They speak with a boldness unexampled. The King
has called them to Versailles to-morrow, where he will hold a _lit de
justice_, and compel them to register the tax. How the chapter will
finish, we must wait to see. By a vessel lately sailed from Havre to
New York, I have sent you some more livraisons of the Encyclopedie,
down to the 22d inclusive. They were in a box with Dr. Currie's, and
addressed to Mr. Madison, who will forward them to Richmond. I have
heard you are in the Assembly. I will beg the favor of you, therefore,
to give me, at the close of the session, a history of the most
remarkable acts passed, the parties and views of the House, etc. This,
with the small news of my country, crops and prices, will furnish you
abundant matter to treat me, while I have nothing to give you in
return, but the histories of the follies of nations in their dotage.
Present me in respectful and friendly terms to Mrs. Monroe, and be
assured of the sincere sentiments of esteem and attachment with which I
am, dear Sir, your friend and servant.




TO THE HONORABLE COMMISSIONERS OF THE TREASURY.

PARIS, August 5, 1787.


GENTLEMEN,--In my last of June 17, 1787, I had the honor of
communicating to you the information I had received from Mr. Grand,
that your funds here were out, and he considerably in advance. I took
occasion to mention to him the paragraph in your letter of February 17,
wherein you were so kind as to say your attention should be immediately
turned to the making a remittance. However, I understood soon after
that he had protested a draught of Mr. Carmichael's, as also a smaller
one of five hundred livres. He called upon me, and explaining to me the
extent of his advances, observed that he should not be willing to add
to them, except so far as should be necessary for the private expenses
of myself and secretary, which he wished to be reduced as much below
the ordinary allowance as we could, until remittances should be
received. He will send you by this packet a state of his accounts, by
which he informs me that your account is in arrear about thirty-two
thousand livres, advanced by him, and about fifteen thousand livres
from a fund of the State of Virginia, placed here for the purchase of
arms, making General Washington's statue, etc. In examining his
accounts, I found by the one he had sent you formerly, that you were
debited two articles of ten thousand livres and two thousand seven
hundred and twenty-four livres and sixty-six sous, which belonged to
the account of the State of Virginia. This I must explain to you. That
State had directed me to have the statue of General Washington made,
and given me assurances such as I could rely on, that I should receive
funds immediately. Doctor Franklin was setting out to America, and
Houdon, the statuary, expressed a willingness to go with him. But it
was necessary to advance him a sum of money for that purpose. Rather
than lose the opportunity, I ventured to borrow from the fund of the
United States those two sums for the State of Virginia, which I knew
would be immediately replaced. The funds of the State arrived, (being
nearly two hundred thousand livres,) and enabled me not only to replace
those sums immediately, but to furnish much larger supplies to the
wants of the United States, when their funds failed. Insomuch that the
State of Virginia is now in advance here for the United States about
fifteen thousand livres, as before mentioned. As yet it has not
suffered by any of these advances, but having no money left here but
this balance, I shall be censurable by that State if it be not replaced
in time to answer the demands on them, which will now be made within a
few weeks. Mr. Grand has, by my direction, credited you in the account
he now sends for the two sums of ten thousand livres and two thousand,
seven hundred and twenty-four livres and sixty-six sous, improperly
charged in your former account. He had also debited you in his account
for the whole sums paid by the United States, as well as those paid by
Virginia, as by himself. The purpose of this was to keep the accounts
unmixed, though in fact the funds have been applied occasionally in aid
of each other.

I had proposed to Mr. Barclay the settlement of my account before his
departure for Morocco, but we concluded it would be better to do it on
his return, as that would enable me to bring it down to a later day. It
was not then expected he would be so long detained by that business.
Unfortunately for me, when at L'Orient, on his return to Paris, he
found it more advisable to proceed directly to America, so that I have
lost this opportunity of having my account settled. I shall either do
it with him on his return, if he returns soon, or with such other
person here as you will point out, or I will transmit it with copies of
my vouchers, to be settled by you, or do whatever else with it you
shall please to direct. The articles which, from their minuteness, have
not admitted the taking vouchers, I shall be ready to prove by my own
oath. In this account I have presumed to charge the United States with
an outfit. The necessity of this in the case of a minister, resident,
and of course obliged to establish a house, is obvious on reflection.
There cannot be a surer proof of its necessity than the experience and
consent of all nations, as I believe there is no instance of any nation
sending a minister to reside anywhere without an outfit. A year's
salary is the least I have been able to hear of, and I should be able
to show that the articles of clothes, carriage and horses, and
household furniture, in a very plain style, have cost me more than
that. When I send you my account, either settled here, or to be settled
there, I shall take the liberty of referring this article to the
consideration of Congress. Its reasonableness has appeared to me so
palpable, that I have presumed it would appear so to Congress, and have
therefore kept up the expenses of my house at the current rate of nine
thousand dollars a year. If my expectations should be thought
unreasonable, I shall submit and immediately reduce my establishment,
with such rigor, as to make up this article in the shortest time
possible. I enclose you a letter from Fisseaux & Co. on the subject of
their loan. I wish the loan lately obtained by Mr. Adams, may enable
you to get rid of the debt of the Foreign Officers, principal and
interest. Indeed, if Mr. Adams could be charged with the transfer of
our whole debt from this country to Holland, it would be a most
salutary operation. The confusions of that country might perhaps
facilitate that measure at present, though no regular tax could be
obtained in the moment for payment of the interest. I have the honor to
be, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem and respect, gentlemen,
your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

PARIS, August 6, 1787.


SIR,--The last letter I had the honor of addressing you, was dated June
the 21st. I have now that of enclosing you a letter from the Swedish
Ambassador, praying that inquiry may be made for a vessel of his
nation, piratically carried off, and measures taken relative to the
vessel, cargo and crew. Also a letter from William Russell and others,
citizens of America, concerned in trade to the island of Guadeloupe,
addressed to the Marechal de Castries, and complaining of the shutting
to them the port of Point ‚Ä° Pitre, and receiving them only at
Bessa-tern. This was enclosed to me by the subscribers, to be delivered
to the Marechal de Castries. But the present is not the moment to move
in that business; and moreover, I suppose, that whenever parties are
within the reach of Congress, they should apply to them, and my
instructions come through that channel. Matters arising within the
kingdom of France, to which my commission is limited, and not admitting
time to take the orders of Congress, I suppose I may move in
originally. I also enclose you the copy of a letter from Mr. Barclay,
closing his proceedings in our affairs with Morocco. Before this
reaches you, he will have had the honor of presenting himself to you in
person. After his departure, the parliament of Bordeaux decided that he
was liable to arrest. This was done on a letter from the Minister,
informing them that Mr. Barclay was invested with no character which
privileged him from arrest. His constant character of consul was no
protection, and they did not explain whether his character to Morocco
was not originally diplomatic, or was expired. Mr. Barclay's
proceedings under this commission being now closed, it would be
incumbent on me to declare with respect to them, as well as his
consular transactions, my opinion of the judgment, zeal and
disinterestedness with which he has conducted himself; were it not that
Congress has been so possessed of those transactions from time to time,
as to judge for themselves. I cannot but be uneasy, lest my delay of
entering on the subject of the consular convention, may be disapproved.
My hope was and is, that more practicable terms might be obtained; in
this hope, I do nothing till further orders, observing by an extract
from the journals you were pleased to send me, that Congress have
referred the matter to your consideration, and conscious that we are
not suffering in the meantime, as we have not a single consul in
France, since the departure of Mr. Barclay. I mentioned to you in my
last, the revival of the hopes of the Chevalier de La Luzerne. I
thought it my duty to remind the Count de Montmorin, the other day, of
the long absence of their Minister from Congress. He told me, the
Chevalier de La Luzerne would not be sent back, but that we might rely
that, in the month of October, a person would be sent, with whom we
should be content. He did not name the person, though there is no doubt
that it is the Count de Mourtier. It is an appointment, which,
according to the opinion I have formed of him, bids as fair to give
content, as any one which could be made.

I also mentioned in my last letter, that I had proposed the reducing
the substance of Monsieur de Calonnes' letter into the form of an
_Arret_, with some alterations, which, on consultation with the
merchants at the different ports I visited, I had found to be
necessary. I received, soon after, a letter from the Comptroller
General, informing me, that the letter of Monsieur de Calonnes was in a
course of execution. Of this, I enclose you a copy. I was, in that
moment, enclosing to him my general observations on that letter, a copy
of which are also enclosed. In these, I stated all the alterations I
wished to have made. It became expedient, soon after, to bring on the
article of tobacco; first, to know whether the Farmers had executed the
order of Bernis, and also to prepare some arrangements to succeed the
expiration of this order. So that I am now pursuing the whole subject
of our commerce, 1, to have necessary amendments made in Monsieur de
Calonnes' letter; 2, to put it into a more stable form; 3, to have full
execution of the order of Bernis; 4, to provide arrangements for the
article of tobacco, after that order shall be expired. By the copy of
my letter on the two last points, you will perceive that I again press
the abolition of the Farm of this article. The conferences on that
subject give no hope of effecting that. Some poor palliative is
probably all we shall obtain. The Marquis de La Fayette goes hand in
hand with me in all these transactions, and is an invaluable auxiliary
to me. I hope it will not be imputed either to partiality or
affectation, my naming this gentleman so often in my despatches. Were I
not to do it, it would be a suppression of truth, and the taking to
myself the whole merit where he has the greatest share.

The Emperor, on his return to Vienna, disavowed the concessions of his
Governors General to his subjects of Brabant. He, at the same time,
proposed their sending deputies to him, to consult on their affairs.
They refused in the first moment; but afterwards nominated deputies;
without giving them any power, however, to concede anything. In the
meantime, they are arming and training themselves. Probably the Emperor
will avail himself of the aid of these deputies to tread back his
steps. He will be the more prompt to do this, that he may be in
readiness to act freely, if he finds occasion, in the new scenes
preparing in Holland. What these will be cannot be foreseen. You well
know, that the original party-divisions of that country were, into
Stadtholderians, Aristocrats, and Democrats. There was a subdivision of
the Aristocrats, into violent and moderate, which was important. The
violent Aristocrats would have wished to preserve all the powers of
government in the hands of the Regents, and that these should remain
self-elective; but choosing to receive a modification of these powers
from the Stadtholder, rather than from the people, they threw
themselves into his scale. The moderate Aristocrats would have
consented to a temperate mixture of democracy, and particularly, that
the Regents should be elected by the people. They were the declared
enemies of the Stadtholder, and acted in concert with the Democrats,
forming with them what was called the Patriots. It is the opinion of
dispassionate people on the spot, that their views might have been
effected. But the democratic party aimed at more. They talked of
establishing tribunes of the people, of annual accounts, of depriving
the magistrates at the will of the people, etc.; of enforcing all this
with the arms in the hands of the _corps francs_; and in same places,
as at Heusden, Sprang, etc., began the execution of these projects. The
moderate Aristocrats found it difficult to strain their principles to
this pitch. A schism took place between them and the Democrats, and the
former have for some time, been dropping off from the latter, into the
scale of the Stadtholder. This is the fatal coalition which governs
without obstacle in Zealand, Friesland, and Guelderland, which
constitutes the States of Utrecht, at Amersfort, and, with their aid,
the plurality in the States General. The States of Holland, Groningen
and Overyssel vote, as yet, in the opposition. But the coalition gains
ground in the States of Holland, and has been prevalent in the Council
of Amsterdam. If its progress be not stopped by a little moderation in
the Democrats, it will turn the scale decidedly in favor of the
Stadtholder, in the event of their being left to themselves without
foreign interference. If foreign powers interfere, their prospect does
not brighten. I see no sure friends to the Patriots but France, while
Prussia and England are their assured enemies. Nor is it probable that
characters so greedy, so enterprising, as the Emperor and Empress, will
be idle during such a struggle. Their views have long shown which side
they would take. That France has engaged to interfere, and to support
the Patriots, is beyond doubt. This engagement was entered into during
the life of the late King of Prussia, whose eye was principally
directed on the Emperor, and whose dispositions towards the Prince of
Orange would have permitted him to be clipped a little close. But the
present King comes in with warmer dispositions towards the Princess his
sister. He has shown decidedly, that he will support her, even to the
destruction of the balance of Europe, and the disturbance of its peace.
The King of England has equally decided to support that house, at the
risk of plunging his nation into another war. He supplies the Prince
with money at this moment. A particular remittance of one hundred and
twenty thousand guineas is known of. But his ministry is divided. Pitt
is against the King's opinion, the Duke of Richmond and the rest of the
ministers, for it. Or at least, such is the belief here. Mr. Adams will
have informed you more certainly. This division in the English
ministry, with the ill condition of their finances for war, produces a
disposition, even in the King, to try first every pacific measure; and
that country and this were laboring jointly to stop the course of
hostilities in Holland, to endeavor to effect an accommodation, and
were scarcely executing at all, the armaments ordered in their ports;
when all of a sudden, an inflammatory letter written by the Princess of
Orange to the King of Prussia, induces him, without consulting England,
without consulting even his own Council, to issue orders by himself to
his Generals, to march twenty thousand men, to revenge the insult
supposed to be offered to his sister. With a pride and egotism planted
in the heart of every King, he considers her being stopped in the road,
as a sufficient cause to sacrifice a hundred or two thousand of his own
subjects, and as many of his enemies, and to spread fire, sword and
desolation, over the half of Europe. This hasty measure has embarrassed
England, undesirous of war if it can be avoided, yet unwilling to
separate from the power who is to render its success probable. Still
you may be assured, that that court is going on in concurrence with
this, to prevent extremities, if possible; always understood, that if
the war cannot be prevented, they will enter into it as parties, and in
opposition to one another. This event is, in my opinion, to be
deprecated by the friends of France. She never was equal to such a war
by land, and such a one by sea; and less so now, than in any moment of
the present reign. You remember that the nation was in a delirium of
joy on the convocation of the Notables, and on the various reformations
agreed on between them and the government. The picture of the distress
of their finances was indeed frightful, but the intentions to reduce
them to order seemed serious. The constitutional reformations have gone
on well, but those of expenses make little progress. Some of the most
obviously useless have indeed been lopped off, but the remainder is a
heavy mass, difficult to be reduced. Despair has seized every mind, and
they have passed from an extreme of joy to one of discontent. The
parliament, therefore, oppose the registering any new tax, and insist
on an Assembly of the States General. The object of this is to limit
expenses, and dictate a constitution. The edict for the stamp tax has
been the subject of reiterated orders and refusals to register. At
length, the King has summoned the parliament to Versailles to hold a
bed of justice, in which he will order them, in person, to register the
edict. At the moment of my writing, they are gone to Versailles for
this purpose. There will yet remain to them, to protest against the
register, as forced, and to issue orders against its execution on pain
of death. But as the King would have no peaceable mode of opposition
left, it remains to be seen whether they will push the matter to this
extremity. It is evident, I think, that a spirit of this country is
advancing towards a revolution in their constitution. There are not
wanting persons at the helm, friends to the progress of this spirit.
The Provincial Assemblies will be the most probable instrument of
effecting it.

Since writing thus far, I have received an intimation, that it will be
agreeable, not to press our commercial regulations at this moment, the
ministry being too much occupied with the difficulties surrounding
them, to spare a moment on any subject which will admit of delay. Our
business must, therefore, be suspended for awhile. To press it out of
season would be to defeat it. It would be felt as a vital benefit here,
could we relieve their finances, by paying what we owe. Congress will
judge by Mr. Adams' letters, how far the transferring all our debts in
this country, to Holland, is practicable. On the replenishing their
treasury with our principal and interest, I should not be afraid to ask
concessions in favor of our West India trade. It would produce a great
change of opinion as to us and our affairs. In the Assembl√àe des
Notables, hard things were said of us. They were induced, however, in
committing us to writing, to smother their ideas a little. In the
notes, now gone to be printed, our debt is described in these words.
"The twenty-first article of the account, formed of the interest of the
claims of his majesty on the United States of America, cannot be drawn
out for the present, except as a document. The recovery of these
claims, as well principal as perhaps even interest, although they
appear to rest on the most solid security, may, nevertheless, be long
delayed, and should not, consequently, be taken into account in
estimating the annual revenue. This article amounts to one million and
six hundred thousand livres." Above all things, it is desirable to hush
the foreign officers by payment. Their wants, the nature of their
services, their access to high characters, and connections with them,
bespeak the reasons for this. I hear also that Mr. Beaumarchais means
to make himself heard, if a memorial which he sends by an agent in the
present packet is not attended to, as he thinks it ought to be. He
called on me with it, and desired me to recommend his case to a
decision, and to note in my despatch, that it was the first time he had
spoken to me on the subject. This is true, it being the first time I
ever saw him; but my recommendations would be as displaced as
unnecessary. I assured him, Congress would do in that business, what
justice should require, and their means enable them. The information
sent me by Mr. Montgomery from Alicant, of the death of the Dey of
Algiers, was not true. I had expressed my doubt of it in my last, when
I communicated it. I send herewith the newspapers to this date, and a
remonstrance of the parliament, to show you in what language the King
can be addressed at this day. I have received no journal of Congress
since the beginning of November last, and will thank you for them if
printed.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem and
respect, Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.

P. S. August 7. The parliament were received yesterday very harshly by
the King. He obliged them to register the two edicts for the
impot-territorial and stamp tax. When speaking in my letter of the
reiterated orders and refusals to register, which passed between the
King and parliament, I omitted to insert the King's answer to a
deputation of parliament, which attended him at Versailles. It may
serve to show the spirit which exists between them. It was in these
words, and these only: "Je vous ferai savoir mes intentions.
Allez-vous-en. Qu'on ferme la porte."




TO GOVERNOR RUTLEDGE.

PARIS, Aug. 6, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I am honored with your letter by your son, and shall be
happy to render him every assistance in my power of whatever nature.
The objects of his stay in this country, and of his visit to London,
are perfectly well judged. So of that to Amsterdam. Perhaps it is
questionable, whether the time you propose he should spend at some of
the German courts might not be better employed at Madrid or Lisbon, and
in Italy. At the former there could be no object for him but politics,
the system of which there is intricate, and can never be connected with
us; nor will our commercial connections be considerable. With Madrid
and Lisbon our connections, both political and commercial, are great
and will be increasing daily. Italy is a field where the inhabitants of
the Southern States may see much to copy in agriculture, and a country
with which we shall carry on considerable trade. Pardon my submitting
these thoughts to you. We shall pursue your own plan unless you notify
a change in it.

The present question in Europe is war or not war? I think there will be
none between the Emperor and his Brabantine subjects. But as to
Holland, it is more doubtful, for we do not as yet consider the little
partisan affairs which are taking place every day. France and England,
conscious that their exhausted means would poorly feed a war, have been
strenuously exerting themselves to procure an accommodation. But the
King of Prussia, in a moment of passion, has taken a measure which may
defeat their wishes. On receiving from the Princess of Orange, a letter
informing him of her having been stopped on the road, without
consulting the court of London, without saying a word to his own
ministers, he issued orders himself to his Generals to march twenty
thousand men to be at her orders. England, unwilling to bring on a war,
may yet fear to separate from him who is to be her main ally. Still,
she is endeavoring, in concurrence with this court, to stop the effects
of this hasty movement, and to bring about a suspension of hostilities
and settlement of difficulties, always meaning if they fail in this, to
take the field in opposition to one another. Blessed effect of a kingly
government, where a pretended insult to the sister of a king, is to
produce the wanton sacrifice of a hundred or two thousand of the people
who have entrusted themselves to his government, and as many of his
enemies! and we think ours a bad government. The only condition on
earth to be compared with ours, in my opinion, is that of the Indian,
where they have still less law than we. The European, are governments
of kites over pigeons. The best schools for republicanism are London,
Versailles, Madrid, Vienna, Berlin, &c. Adieu, my dear Sir, and be
assured of the sincere esteem of your most obedient humble servant.




TO MONSIEUR DE CREVE-COEUR.

PARIS, August 6, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I was not a little disappointed to find on my return that
you had gone punctually in the packet as you had proposed. Great is the
change in the dispositions of this country in the short time since you
left it. A continuation of inconsiderate expense seemed to have raised
the nation to the highest pitch of discontent. The parliament refused
to register the new taxes. After much and warm altercation, a _lit de
justice_ has been held this day at Versailles; it was opened by the
reading a severe remonstrance from the parliament, to which the King
made a hard reply, and finished by ordering the stamp tax, and
impot-territorial to be registered. Your nation is advancing to a
change of constitution; the young desire it, the middle aged are not
averse, the old alone opposed it. They will die, the provincial
assemblies will chalk out the plan, and the nation, ripening fast, will
execute it. All your friends are in the country, so I can give you no
news of them; but no news are always good news. The Duchess Danville is
with some of her friends; the Duke and Duchess de La Rochefoucault gone
to the waters; the Countess d'Houdelot with Madame de La Britu. Your
sons are well, and go on well, and we are laboring here to improve on
M. de Calonne's letter on our commerce. Adieu, my dear Sir, and be
assured of the sentiments of sincere esteem with which I am your friend
and servant.




TO COLONEL RICHARD CLAIBORNE.

PARIS, August 8, 1787.


SIR,--I am of opinion that American tenants for western lands could not
be procured, and if they could, they would be very unsure. The best, as
far as I have been able to judge, are foreigners, who do not speak the
language. Unable to communicate with the people of the country, they
confine themselves to their farms and their families, compare their
present state to what it was in Europe, and find great reason to be
contented. Of all foreigners, I should prefer Germans. They are the
easiest got, the best for their landlords, and do best for themselves.
The deed in which you were interested, having been sent to me the other
day to be authenticated, I took the enclosed note of its particulars
for you. I am, with much esteem, Sir, your most obedient, and most
humble servant.




TO JOHN CHURCHMAN.

PARIS, August 8, 1787.


SIR,--I have duly received your favor of June the 6th, and immediately
communicated its contents to a member of the Academy. He told me that
they had received the other copy of your memorial, which you mention to
have sent through another channel; that your ideas were not conveyed so
explicitly, as to enable them to decide finally on their merit, but
that they had made an entry in their journals, to preserve to you the
claim of the original idea. As far as we can conjecture it here, we
imagine you make a table of variations of the needle, for all the
different meridians whatever. To apply this table to use, in the voyage
between America and Europe, suppose the variation to increase a degree
in every one hundred and sixty miles. Two difficulties occur: 1, a
ready and accurate method of finding the variation of the place; 2, an
instrument so perfect, as that (though the degree on it shall represent
one hundred and sixty miles) it shall give the parts of the degree so
minutely, as to answer the purpose of the navigator. The variation of
the needle at Paris, actually, is 21‚àû west. I make no question you have
provided against the doubts entertained here, and I shall be happy that
our country may have the honor of furnishing the old world what it has
so long sought in vain. I am, with much respect, Sir, your most
obedient humble servant.




TO MONSIEUR L'HOMMANDE.

PARIS, August 9, 1787.


SIR,--At the time you honored me with your letter of May the 31st, I
was not returned from a journey I had taken into Italy. This
circumstance, with the mass of business which had accumulated during my
absence, must apologise for the delay of my answer. Every discovery
which multiplies the subsistence of man, must be a matter of joy to
every friend to humanity. As such, I learn with great satisfaction,
that you have found the means of preserving flour more perfectly than
has been done hitherto. But I am not authorized to avail my country of
it, by making any offer for its communication. Their policy is, to
leave their citizens free, neither restraining nor aiding them in their
pursuits. Though the interposition of government, in matters of
invention, has its use, yet it is in practice so inseparable from
abuse, that they think it better not to meddle with it. We are only to
hope, therefore, that those governments who are in the habit of
directing all the actions of their subjects, by particular law, may be
so far sensible of the duty they are under of cultivating useful
discoveries, as to reward you amply for yours, which is among the most
interesting to humanity. I have the honor to be, with great
consideration and respect, Sir, your most obedient, and most humble
servant.




TO PETER CARR.

PARIS, August 10, 1787.


DEAR PETER,--I have received your two letters of December the 30th and
April the 18th, and am very happy to find by them, as well as by
letters from Mr. Wythe, that you have been so fortunate as to attract
his notice and good will; I am sure you will find this to have been one
of the most fortunate events of your life, as I have ever been sensible
it was of mine. I enclose you a sketch of the sciences to which I would
wish you to apply, in such order as Mr. Wythe shall advise; I mention,
also, the books in them worth your reading, which submit to his
correction. Many of these are among your father's books, which you
should have brought to you. As I do not recollect those of them not in
his library, you must write to me for them, making out a catalogue of
such as you think you shall have occasion for, in eighteen months from
the date of your letter, and consulting Mr. Wythe on the subject. To
this sketch, I will add a few particular observations:

1. Italian. I fear the learning this language will confound your French
and Spanish. Being all of them degenerated dialects of the Latin, they
are apt to mix in conversation. I have never seen a person speaking the
three languages, who did not mix them. It is a delightful language, but
late events having rendered the Spanish more useful, lay it aside to
prosecute that.

2. Spanish. Bestow great attention on this, and endeavor to acquire an
accurate knowledge of it. Our future connections with Spain and Spanish
America, will render that language a valuable acquisition. The ancient
history of that part of America, too, is written in that language. I
send you a dictionary.

3. Moral Philosophy. I think it lost time to attend lectures on this
branch. He who made us would have been a pitiful bungler, if he had
made the rules of our moral conduct a matter of science. For one man of
science, there are thousands who are not. What would have become of
them? Man was destined for society. His morality, therefore, was to be
formed to this object. He was endowed with a sense of right and wrong,
merely relative to this. This sense is as much a part of his nature, as
the sense of hearing, seeing, feeling; it is the true foundation of
morality, and not the [Greek: to kalon], truth, &c., as fanciful
writers have imagined. The moral sense, or conscience, is as much a
part of man as his leg or arm. It is given to all human beings in a
stronger or weaker degree, as force of members is given them in a
greater or less degree. It may be strengthened by exercise, as may any
particular limb of the body. This sense is submitted, indeed, in some
degree, to the guidance of reason; but it is a small stock which is
required for this: even a less one than what we call common sense.
State a moral case to a ploughman and a professor. The former will
decide it as well, and often better than the latter, because he has not
been led astray by artificial rules. In this branch, therefore, read
good books, because they will encourage, as well as direct your
feelings. The writings of Sterne, particularly, form the best course of
morality that ever was written. Besides these, read the books mentioned
in the enclosed paper; and, above all things, lose no occasion of
exercising your dispositions to be grateful, to be generous, to be
charitable, to be humane, to be true, just, firm, orderly, courageous,
&c. Consider every act of this kind, as an exercise which will
strengthen your moral faculties and increase your worth.

4. Religion. Your reason is now mature enough to examine this object.
In the first place, divest yourself of all bias in favor of novelty and
singularity of opinion. Indulge them in any other subject rather than
that of religion. It is too important, and the consequences of error
may be too serious. On the other hand, shake off all the fears and
servile prejudices, under which weak minds are servilely crouched. Fix
reason firmly in her seat, and call to her tribunal every fact, every
opinion. Question with boldness even the existence of a God; because,
if there be one, he must more approve of the homage of reason, than
that of blindfolded fear. You will naturally examine first, the
religion of your own country. Read the Bible, then, as you would read
Livy or Tacitus. The facts which are within the ordinary course of
nature, you will believe on the authority of the writer, as you do
those of the same kind in Livy and Tacitus. The testimony of the writer
weighs in their favor, in one scale, and their not being against the
laws of nature, does not weigh against them. But those facts in the
Bible which contradict the laws of nature, must be examined with more
care, and under a variety of faces. Here you must recur to the
pretensions of the writer to inspiration from God. Examine upon what
evidence his pretensions are founded, and whether that evidence is so
strong, as that its falsehood would be more improbable than a change in
the laws of nature, in the case he relates. For example, in the book of
Joshua, we are told, the sun stood still several hours. Were we to read
that fact in Livy or Tacitus, we should class it with their showers of
blood, speaking of statues, beasts, etc. But it is said, that the
writer of that book was inspired. Examine, therefore, candidly, what
evidence there is of his having been inspired. The pretension is
entitled to your inquiry, because millions believe it. On the other
hand, you are astronomer enough to know how contrary it is to the law
of nature that a body revolving on its axis, as the earth does, should
have stopped, should not, by that sudden stoppage, have prostrated
animals, trees, buildings, and should after a certain time have resumed
its revolution, and that without a second general prostration. Is this
arrest of the earth's motion, or the evidence which affirms it, most
within the law of probabilities? You will next read the New Testament.
It is the history of a personage called Jesus. Keep in your eye the
opposite pretensions: 1, of those who say he was begotten by God, born
of a virgin, suspended and reversed the laws of nature at will, and
ascended bodily into heaven; and 2, of those who say he was a man of
illegitimate birth, of a benevolent heart, enthusiastic mind, who set
out without pretensions to divinity, ended in believing them, and was
punished capitally for sedition, by being gibbeted, according to the
Roman law, which punished the first commission of that offence by
whipping, and the second by exile, or death _in furea_. See this law in
the Digest, Lib. 48. tit. 19. √ü 28.3. and Lipsius Lib. 2. de cruce.
cap. 2. These questions are examined in the books I have mentioned,
under the head of Religion, and several others. They will assist you in
your inquiries; but keep your reason firmly on the watch in reading
them all. Do not be frightened from this inquiry by any fear of its
consequences. If it ends in a belief that there is no God, you will
find incitements to virtue in the comfort and pleasantness you feel in
its exercise, and the love of others which it will procure you. If you
find reason to believe there is a God, a consciousness that you are
acting under his eye, and that he approves you, will be a vast
additional incitement; if that there be a future state, the hope of a
happy existence in that increases the appetite to deserve it; if that
Jesus was also a God, you will be comforted by a belief of his aid and
love. In fine, I repeat, you must lay aside all prejudice on both
sides, and neither believe nor reject anything, because any other
persons, or description of persons, have rejected or believed it. Your
own reason is the only oracle given you by heaven, and you are
answerable, not for the rightness, but uprightness of the decision. I
forgot to observe, when speaking of the New Testament, that you should
read all the histories of Christ, as well of those whom a council of
ecclesiastics have decided for us, to be Pseudo-evangelists, as those
they named Evangelists. Because these Pseudo-evangelists pretended to
inspiration, as much as the others, and you are to judge their
pretensions by your own reason, and not by the reason of those
ecclesiastics. Most of these are lost. There are some, however, still
extant, collected by Fabricius, which I will endeavor to get and send
you.

5. Travelling. This makes men wiser, but less happy. When men of sober
age travel, they gather knowledge, which they may apply usefully for
their country; but they are subject ever after to recollections mixed
with regret; their affections are weakened by being extended over more
objects; and they learn new habits which cannot be gratified when they
return home. Young men, who travel, are exposed to all these
inconveniences in a higher degree, to others still more serious, and do
not acquire that wisdom for which a previous foundation is requisite,
by repeated and just observations at home. The glare of pomp and
pleasure is analogous to the motion of the blood; it absorbs all their
affection and attention, they are torn from it as from the only good in
this, world, and return to their home as to a place of exile and
condemnation. Their eyes are forever turned back to the object they
have lost, and its recollection poisons the residue of their lives.
Their first and most delicate passions are hackneyed on unworthy
objects here, and they carry home the dregs, insufficient to make
themselves or anybody else happy. Add to this, that a habit of
idleness, an inability to apply themselves to business is acquired, and
renders them useless to themselves and their country. These
observations are founded in experience. There is no place where your
pursuit of knowledge will be so little obstructed by foreign objects,
as in your own country, nor any, wherein the virtues of the heart will
be less exposed to be weakened. Be good, be learned, and be
industrious, and you will not want the aid of travelling, to render you
precious to your country, dear to your friends, happy within yourself.
I repeat my advice, to take a great deal of exercise, and on foot.
Health is the first requisite after morality. Write to me often, and be
assured of the interest I take in your success, as well as the warmth
of those sentiments of attachment with which I am, dear Peter, your
affectionate friend.




TO DR. GEORGE GILMER.

PARIS, August 11, 1787.


DEAR DOCTOR,--Your letter of January the 9th, 1787, came safely to hand
in the month of June last. Unluckily you forgot to sign it, and your
handwriting is so Protean, that one cannot be sure it is yours. To
increase the causes of incertitude, it was dated _Pen-park_, a name
which I only know, as the seat of John Harmer. The handwriting, too,
being somewhat in his style, made me ascribe it hastily to him, indorse
it with his name, and let it lie in my bundle to be answered at
leisure. That moment of leisure arriving, I set down to answer it to
John Harmer, and now, for the first time, discover marks of its being
yours, and particularly those expressions of friendship to myself and
family, which you have ever been so good as to entertain, and which are
to me among the most precious possessions. I wish my sense of this, and
my desires of seeing you rich and happy, may not prevent my seeing any
difficulty in the case you state of George Harmer's wills; which as you
state them, are thus:

1. A will, dated December the 26th, 1779, written in his own hand, and
devising to his brother the estates he had received from him.

2. Another will, dated June the 25th, 1782, written also in his own
hand, devising his estate to trustees, to be conveyed to such of his
relations. I. H. I. L. or H. L. as should become capable of acquiring
property, or, on failure of that, to be sold and the money remitted
them.

3. A third will, dated September the 12th, 1786, devising all his
estate at Marrowbone, and his tracts at Horse-pasture and Poison-field
to you; which will is admitted to record, and of course, has been duly
executed.

You say the learned are divided on these wills. Yet I see no cause of
division, as it requires little learning to decide, that "the first
deed and last will must always prevail." I am afraid, therefore, the
difficulty may arise on the want of words of inheritance in the devise
to you; for you state it as a devise to "George Gilmer" (without adding
"and to his heirs,") of "all the _estate_ called Marrowbone," "the
_tract_ called Horse-pasture," and "the _tract_ called Poison-field."
If the question is on this point, and you have copied the words of the
will exactly, I suppose you take an estate in fee simple in Marrowbone,
and for life only in Horse-pasture and Poison-field; the want of words
of inheritance in the two last cases, being supplied as to the first,
by the word "estate," which has been repeatedly decided to be
descriptive of the quantum of interest devised, as well as of its
locality. I am in hopes, however, you have not copied the words
exactly, that there are words of inheritance to all the devises, as the
testator certainly knew their necessity, and that the conflict only
will be between the different wills, in which case I see nothing which
can be opposed to the last. I shall be very happy to eat at Pen-park,
some of the good mutton and beef of Marrowbone, Horse-pasture and
Poison-field, with yourself and Mrs. Gilmer, and my good old neighbors.
I am as happy nowhere else, and in no other society, and all my wishes
end, where I hope my days will end, at Monticello. Too many scenes of
happiness mingle themselves with all the recollections of my native
woods and fields, to suffer them to be supplanted in my affection by
any other. I consider myself here as a traveller only, and not a
resident. My commission expires next spring, and if not renewed, I
shall, of course, return then. If renewed, I shall remain here some
time longer. How much, I cannot say; yet my wishes shorten the period.
Among the strongest inducements will be, that of your society and Mrs.
Gilmer's, which I am glad to find brought more within reach, by your
return to Pen-park. My daughters are importunate to return also. Patsy
enjoys good health, and is growing to my stature. Maria arrived here
about a month ago, after a favorable voyage, and in perfect health. My
own health has been as good as ever, after the first year's probation.
If you knew how agreeable to me are the details of the small news of my
neighborhood, your charity would induce you to write frequently. Your
letters lodged in the post office at Richmond (to be forwarded to New
York) come with certainty. We are doubtful yet, whether there will be
war or not. Present me with warm affection to Mrs. Gilmer, and be
assured yourself of the unvarying sentiments of esteem and attachment,
with which I am, dear Doctor, your sincere friend and servant.




TO COLONEL T. M. RANDOLPH.

PARIS, August 11, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--Mr. Ammonett sent me your favor of May 7, which you expected
he would have brought. He furnished me with the name of the family to
whose property he supposes himself entitled, and the name of the town
where it lies. I have endeavored to have them searched out, but as yet
neither family nor town is discovered. If they can be found, the estate
will then have to be searched for; the laws for limitation of actions
will form the next opposition to him, and probably the laws of
forfeiture against the Protestants, who were the subject of the
revocation of the edict of Nantes, which laws have never been repealed,
nor probably ever will be, even should the future condition of
Protestants here be mitigated. I shall proceed in the enquiry for him,
and let him know the result.

Your son Thomas, at Edinburgh, has done me the favor to open a little
correspondence with me. He has sometimes asked my advice as to the
course of his studies, which I have given to him the more freely as he
informed me he was not tied down to any particular plan by your
instructions. He informed me in his last letter that you proposed he
should come to Paris this fall, stay here the winter, and return to
Virginia in the spring. I understand him as proposing to study the law,
so that probably, on his return, you will place him at Williamsburg for
that purpose. On this view of his destination I venture to propose to
you another plan. The law may be studied as well in one place as
another; because it is a study of books alone, at least till near the
close of it. Books can be read equally well at Williamsburg, at London,
or Paris. The study of the law is an affair of three years, the last of
which should be spent in attending Mr. Wythe's lectures. Upon the plan
he has now in expectation, his residence here six months as a
traveller, must cost him two hundred guineas, and three years' study at
Williamsburg, four hundred and fifty guineas more, making five hundred
and fifty guineas in the whole. My proposition is that he shall pass
his two first years of legal study in some one of the villages within
an hour's walk of Paris, boarded with some good family, wherein he may
learn to speak the language, which is not to be learned in any other
way. By this means he will avoid the loss of time and money which would
be the consequence of a residence in the town, and he will be nigh
enough to come to dine, to make acquaintances, see good company, and
examine the useful details of the city. With very great economy he may
do this on one hundred guineas a year, but at his ease for one hundred
and fifty guineas. At the end of two years I would propose him a
journey through the southern parts of France, thence to Genoa, Leghorn,
Florence, Rome, Naples, Venice, Milan, Turin, Geneva, Lyons and Paris.
This will employ him seven months, and cost him three hundred and
thirty guineas, if he goes alone, or two hundred and thirty guineas if
he finds a companion. Then he should return to Virginia, and pass his
third year of legal study in attending Mr. Wythe's lectures. This whole
plan would take three years and seven months, and cost from seven
hundred to seven hundred and fifty guineas, which would be one month
longer, and one hundred and fifty or two hundred guineas dearer than
the one proposed. The advantages of this would be his learning to speak
French well, his acquiring a better acquaintance here with men and
things, and his having travelled through the most interesting parts of
Europe, advantages which he will forever think cheaply purchased for
one hundred and fifty or two hundred guineas, even were a deduction of
that sum to be made from the establishment you mean to give him. But in
every case, whether you decide that he shall return to study in
Virginia, or remain here for that purpose, I would recommend that he
should not be tied down to quit Edinburgh this fall precisely, but only
when he shall have finished his courses of lectures in those sciences
with which he should not be unacquainted. I have taken the liberty of
noting these to him. I perceive by his letters that he has a good
genius, and everybody bears witness to his application, which is almost
too great. It would be a pity, therefore, he should miss of giving them
full encouragement. I must beg your pardon for thus intruding myself
into a business belonging to yourself alone, and hope you will find its
excuse in the motives from which it proceeds, friendship for yourself,
Mrs. Randolph and your son. I wish to see you gratified, and to be
gratified myself in seeing him act the advantageous part, which will
naturally result from his talents, his merit, and the favorable ground
from which he will start; a fear of seeing this endangered by a too
early return to our own country where the example of his cotemporaries
may soon possibly lead him from the regular pursuits his friends may
chalk out for him, all these considerations have impelled me to take
this liberty, and to rely for pardon on the assurance of the sincere
attachment and respect with which I am, dear Sir, your affectionate
friend and servant.




TO THE REVEREND JAMES MADISON.

PARIS, August 13, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I have been long, very long, without answering your favor of
March 27, 1786, and since that I have received those of December 28,
and by Mrs. Oster. The reason of this has been that the genius of
invention and improvement in Europe seems to be absolutely taking a
nap. We have nothing to communicate to you but of the small kind, such
as making the axletree turn with the wheel, which has been proposed
here, adopted by some, and thought to be proved best by experiment,
though theory has nothing to urge in its favor. A hydrostatic waistcoat
is lately announced, which a person puts on either above or below his
clothes in a minute, and fills with air by blowing with the mouth in
twelve seconds. It is not yet shown, however, so I cannot tell you
either the manner or matter of its construction. It may be useful when
the loss of a vessel is foreseen. Herschell's discovery of two
satellites to his planet, you have heard of ere this. He first saw them
in January last. One revolves round its principal in about a week; the
other in about a fortnight. I think your conjecture that the periodical
variation of light in certain fixed stars proceeds from Macul√ä, is more
probable than that of Maupertius, who supposes those bodies may be
flat, and more probable also than that which supposes the star to have
an orbit of revolution so large as to vary sensibly its degree of
light. The latter is rendered more difficult of belief from the
shortness of the period of variation. I thank you for the shells you
sent me. Their identity with marine shells and their vicinity to the
sea, argue an identity of cause. But still the shells found in the
mountains are very imperfectly accounted for. I have lately become
acquainted with a memoire on a petrification mixed with shells by a
Monsieur de La Sauvagere, giving an exact account of what Voltaire had
erroneously stated in his questions Encyclopediques, article Coquilles,
from whence I had transferred it into my notes. Having been lately at
Tours, I had an opportunity of enquiring into de La Sauvagere's
character, and the facts he states. The result was entirely in his and
their favor. This fact is so curious, so circumstantially detailed, and
yet so little like any known operation of nature, that it throws the
mind under absolute suspense. The memoir is out of print. But my
bookseller is now in search of it, and if he can find it I will put a
copy of it into a box of books I shall send by the September packet,
addressed to Mr. Wythe. In the same box I will put for you the
Bibliotheque Physico-economique, for 1786, 1787, the connoissance des
tems, Fourcroy's Chemistry, wherein all the later discoveries are
digested, and a number of my notes on Virginia, of a copy of which you
will be pleased to accept. It is a poor crayon, which yourself and the
gentlemen which issue from your school must fill up. We are doubtful
here whether we are to have peace or war. The movements of Prussia and
England indicate war; the finances of England and France indicate
peace. I think the two last will endeavor to accommodate the Dutch
differences. Be pleased to present me respectfully to Mrs. Madison, and
after repeating the recommendation of my nephew to you, I take the
liberty of assuring you of that esteem with which I am, dear Sir, your
friend and servant.




TO THE HONORABLE J. BLAIR.

PARIS, August 13, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I received the letter with which you were pleased to honor
me, by Mrs. Oster, and immediately waited on her with a tender of my
services. She had, however, so far got her matters arranged as to be no
longer in fear of any disagreeable measure, and is since gone to
establish herself with her friends in Lorraine. I wish she may not
there have alarms of a different nature. We have hitherto been in hopes
that the desperate state of the finances of France and England would
indispose those powers to war, and induce them, by an armed mediation,
to quiet the affairs of Holland. The actual march, however, of the
Prussian troops, the departure of the British squadron somewhere
westwardly, and the preparations for a naval armament at Brest, and a
land one in the neighborhood of the Netherlands, render war at present
more expected than it has been. Still we look to the necessities of the
two principal powers as promising efficacy to the negotiations not yet
broken off. Though we shall be neutrals, and as such shall derive
considerable pecuniary advantages, yet I think we shall lose in
happiness and morals by being launched again into the ocean of
speculation, led to overtrade ourselves, tempted to become sea-robbers
under French colors, and to quit the pursuits of agriculture, the
surest road to affluence and best preservative of morals. Perhaps, too,
it may divert the attention of the States from those great political
improvements, which the honorable body, of which you are a member,
will, I hope, propose to them. What these may be, I know not, but I am
sure they will be what they should be. My idea is that we should be
made one nation in every case concerning foreign affairs, and separate
ones in whatever is merely domestic; that the Federal government should
be organized into Legislative, Executive and Judiciary, as are the
State governments, and some peaceable means of enforcement devised for
the Federal head over the States. But of all these things you are a
better judge. I have delivered your message to Mr. Mazzei, who is still
here. Be so good as to present me respectfully to Mrs. Blair, and to be
assured yourself of the sentiments of esteem and respect with which I
have the honor to be, dear Sir, your most obedient, and most humble
servant.




TO JOSEPH JONES.

PARIS, August 14, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I have never yet thanked you, but with the heart, for the
act of Assembly confirming the agreement with Maryland, the pamphlet
and papers I received from you a twelve month ago. Very soon after
their receipt, I got my right wrist dislocated, which prevented me long
from writing, and as soon as that was able to bear it, I took a long
journey, from which I am but lately returned. I am anxious to hear what
our federal convention recommends, and what the States will do in
consequence of their recommendation. * * * * With all the defects of
our constitution, whether general or particular, the comparison of our
governments with those of Europe, is like a comparison of heaven and
hell. England, like the earth, may be allowed to take the intermediate
station. And yet, I hear there are people among you, who think the
experience of our governments has already proved, that republican
governments will not answer. Send those gentry here, to count the
blessings of monarchy. A king's sister, for instance, stopped on the
road, and on a hostile journey, is sufficient cause for him to march
immediately twenty thousand men to revenge this insult, when he had
shown himself little moved by the matter of right then in question.

                 *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

From all these broils we are happily free, and that God may keep us
long so, and yourself in health and happiness, is the prayer of, dear
Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO GENERAL WASHINGTON.

PARIS, August 14, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I am happy to find, by the letter of August the 1st, 1786,
which you did me the honor to write to me, that the modern dress for
your statue would meet your approbation. I found it strongly the
sentiment of West, Copley, Trumbull, and Brown, in London; after which,
it would be ridiculous to add, that it was my own. I think a modern in
an antique dress as just an object of ridicule as a Hercules or Marius
with a periwig and a chapeau bras.

I remember having written to you, while Congress sat at Annapolis, on
the water communication between ours and the western country, and to
have mentioned particularly the information I had received of the plain
face of the country between the sources of Big Beaver and Cayohoga,
which made me hope that a canal of no great expense might unite the
navigation of Lake Erie and the Ohio. You must since have had occasion
of getting better information on this subject, and if you have, you
would oblige me by a communication of it. I consider this canal, if
practicable, as a very important work.

I remain in hopes of great and good effects from the decision of the
Assembly over which you are presiding. To make our States one as to all
foreign concerns, preserve them several as to all merely domestic, to
give to the federal head some peaceable mode of enforcing its just
authority, to organize that head into legislative, executive, and
judiciary apartments, are great desiderata in our federal constitution.
Yet with all its defects, and with all those of our particular
governments, the inconveniences resulting from them, are so light in
comparison with those existing in every other government on earth, that
our citizens may certainly be considered as in the happiest political
situation which exists.

The Assembl√àe des Notables has been productive of much good in this
country. The reformation of some of the most oppressive laws has taken
place, and is taking place. The allotment of the State into subordinate
governments, the administration of which is committed to persons chosen
by the people, will work in time a very beneficial change in their
constitution. The expense of the trappings of monarchy, too, is
lightening. Many of the useless officers, high and low, of the King,
Queen, and Princes, are struck off. Notwithstanding all this, the
discovery of the abominable abuses of public money by the late
Comptroller General, some new expenses of the court, not of a piece
with the projects of reformation, and the imposition of new taxes,
have, in the course of a few weeks, raised a spirit of discontent in
this nation, so great and so general, as to threaten serious
consequences. The parliaments in general, and particularly that of
Paris, put themselves at the head of this effervescence, and direct its
object to the calling the States General, who have not been assembled
since 1614. The object is to fix a constitution, and to limit expenses.
The King has been obliged to hold a bed of justice, to enforce the
registering the new taxes; the parliament, on their side, propose to
issue a prohibition against their execution. Very possibly this may
bring on their exile. The mild and patriotic character of the new
ministry, is the principal dependence against this extremity.

The turn which the affairs of Europe will take, is not yet decided.

                 *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

A war, wherein France, Holland, and England should be parties, seems,
_prima facie_, to promise much advantage to us. But in the first place,
no war can be safe for us which threatens France with an unfavorable
issue; and in the next, it will probably embark us again into the ocean
of speculation, engage us to over-trade ourselves, convert us into
sea-rovers, under French and Dutch colors, divert us from agriculture,
which is our wisest pursuit, because it will in the end contribute most
to real wealth, good morals, and happiness. The wealth acquired by
speculation and plunder, is fugacious in its nature, and fills society
with the spirit of gambling. The moderate and sure income of husbandry
begets permanent improvement, quiet life, and orderly conduct, both
public and private. We have no occasion for more commerce than to take
off our superfluous produce, and the people complain that some
restrictions prevent this; yet the price of articles with us, in
general, shows the contrary. Tobacco, indeed, is low, not because we
cannot carry it where we please, but because we make more than the
consumption requires. Upon the whole I think peace advantageous to us,
necessary for Europe, and desirable for humanity. A few days will
decide, probably, whether all these considerations are to give way to
the bad passions of Kings, and those who would be Kings.

I have the honor to be, with very sincere esteem and respect, dear Sir,
your most obedient, and most humble servant.

P. S. August 15. The parliament is exiled to Troyes this morning.




TO COLONEL HUMPHREYS.

PARIS, August 14, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I remember when you left us, it was with a promise to supply
all the defects of correspondence with our friends, of which we
complained, and which you had felt in common with us. Yet I have
received but one letter from you, which was dated June the 5th, 1786,
and I answered it, August the 14th, 1786. Dropping that, however, and
beginning a new account, I will observe to you, that wonderful
improvements are making here in various lines. In architecture, the
wall of circumvallation round Paris, and the palaces by which we are to
be let out and in, are nearly completed; four hospitals are to be built
instead of the old Hotel-Dieu; one of the old bridges has all its
houses demolished, and a second nearly so; a new bridge is begun at the
Place Louis XV.; the Palais Royale is gutted, a considerable part in
the centre of the garden being dug out, and a subterranean circus
begun, wherein will be equestrian exhibitions, &c. In society, the
habit habill√à is almost banished, and they begin to go even to great
suppers in frock: the court and diplomatic corps, however, must always
be excepted. They are too high to be reached by any improvement. They
are the last refuge from which etiquette, formality, and folly will be
driven. Take away these, and they would be on a level with other
people.

                 *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

[After describing the unsettled state of Europe, as in some of the
preceding letters, the writer proceeds:]

So much for the blessings of having Kings, and magistrates who would be
Kings. From these events, our young Republic may learn useful lessons,
never to call on foreign powers to settle their differences, to guard
against hereditary magistrates, to prevent their citizens from becoming
so established in wealth and power, as to be thought worthy of alliance
by marriage with the nieces, sisters, &c., of Kings, and, in short, to
besiege the throne of heaven with eternal prayers, to extirpate from
creation this class of human lions, tigers, and mammoths called Kings;
from whom, let him perish who does not say, "good Lord deliver us;" and
that so we may say, one and all, or perish, is the fervent prayer of
him who has the honor to mix with it, sincere wishes for your health
and happiness, and to be, with real attachment and respect, dear Sir,
your affectionate friend and humble servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

PARIS, August 15, 1787.


SIR,--An American gentleman leaving Paris this afternoon to go by the
way of L'Orient to Boston, furnishes me the rare occasion of a
conveyance, other than the packet, sure and quick. My letter by the
packet informed you of the bed of justice, for enregistering the stamp
tax and land tax. The parliament, on their return, came to an _Arretee_
(a resolution) which, besides protesting against the enregistering, as
done by force, laid the foundation for an _Arret de defence_ (an act)
against the execution of the two new laws. The question on the final
_Arret_ was adjourned to the day before yesterday. It is believed they
did not conclude on this _Arret_, as it has not appeared. However,
there was a concourse of about ten thousand people at the parliament
house, who, on their adjournment, received them with acclamations of
joy, loosened the horses of the most eminent speakers against the tax
from their carriages, and drew them home. This morning, the parliament
is exiled to Troyes. It is believed to proceed, principally, from the
fear of a popular commotion here.

The officer, charged by this court to watch the English squadron, which
was under sailing orders, returned about a week ago, with information
that it had sailed, having shaped its course westwardly. This is
another step towards war. It is the more suspicious, as their minister
here denies the fact. Count Adhemar is here from London, by leave from
his court. The Duke of Dorset, the British ambassador here, has lately
gone to London on leave. Neither of these ambassadors has the
confidence of his court, on the point of abilities. The latter merits
it for his honesty. The minister of the British court, resident here,
remains; but Mr. Eden, their ambassador to Spain, under pretence of
taking this in his route, is in truth their _factotum_ in the present
emergency. Nothing worth noting has occurred since my last, either in
the Dutch or Austrian Netherlands.

I have the honor to be, with the most perfect esteem and respect, Sir,
your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO THE HONORABLE JAMES MADISON.

PARIS, August 15, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--A gentleman going from hence by L'Orient to Boston,
furnishes me an opportunity of recommending to your care the enclosed
letters, which I could not get ready for the last packet. Pray inform
me in your next whether letters directed to your foreign ministers, or
franked by them, are free of postage; that they ought to be so is
acknowledged substantially by the resolution of Congress, allowing us
to charge postages. I have sometimes suspected that my letters stagnate
in the post-offices. My letters by the last packet brought down the
domestic news of this country to the day in which the bed of justice
was held. The day before yesterday the parliament house was surrounded
by ten thousand people, who received them on their adjournment with
acclamations of joy, took out the horses of the principal speakers and
drew their chariots themselves to their hotels. The parliament not
having taken the desperate step (as far as is yet known) of forbidding
the execution of the new tax laws by an _Arret de defence sur peine de
mort_, we presume it is the fear of a popular commotion which has
occasioned the King to exile them to Troyes. This is known only this
morning. The ministry here have certain information that the English
squadron has sailed and took its course westwardly. This is another
move towards war. No other important fact has taken place since my
letter by the packet. Adieu. Yours affectionately.




TO THE COUNT DEL VERMI.

PARIS, August 15, 1787.


SIR,--In consequence of the permission you were so kind as to give me,
when I had the honor of seeing you at Milan, I shall sometimes take the
liberty of troubling you with a line. I cannot begin with an act of
greater justice than that of expressing to you all my gratitude for
your attentions and services while in your capital, and to which I am
indebted for the best informations I received there. I then mentioned
some late publications on the subject of America, of which I would do
myself the honor of sending you one, because it was my own, and two
others because worth reading. Mine are some notes only on the State of
Virginia. The others are Ramsay's history of the war and Soul√à's
history. The first is very authentic, there being no fact in it which
may not be relied on; but it is confined to the war in the southern
States. The last is a general history, of which we can only say it is
the best of those written in Europe. There is a history of the same
period now printing in London, though written in America by an English
clergyman of the name of Gordon. He had access to some collections of
papers not known to any other writer. But I am unable to say as yet
what may be the merit of his work. You must have observed when in
America, that time and trial had discovered defects in our federal
constitution. A new essay, made in the midst of the flames of war,
could not be perfect. The States have appointed deputies, who are now
sitting at Philadelphia, to consider what are the defects, and to
propose new articles to be added to the instrument of confederation for
amending them. The articles to be proposed by them will have to be
confirmed by Congress and by the Legislature of every State before they
will be in force. As yet their proceedings are not known. Probably they
go to the following points: 1. To invest Congress with the exclusive
sovereignty in every matter relative to foreign nations and the general
mass of our Union, retaining to the States their individual sovereignty
in matters merely domestic. 2. To devise some peaceable mode whereby
Congress may enforce their decisions. 3. To organize Congress into
three branches, Legislative, Executive and Judiciary. I had the honor
of informing you of the commotions which had taken place in
Massachusetts, the only ones which had ever taken place since the
declaration of Independence. I have now that of informing you that
those commotions have been entirely quieted. General Washington is
well, and is president of the federal convention sitting at
Philadelphia, as before mentioned. Dr. Franklin and others, the
greatest characters of America, are members of it. I do not give you
European news; you have that from other quarters; after adding
therefore, that the books before mentioned, are delivered to Messieurs
Cathalan, of Marseilles, who will send them to their correspondent at
Genoa, with instructions to forward them to you at Milan. I shall only
repeat very sincere assurances of the esteem and respect with which I
have the honor to be, Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO JOHN ADAMS.

PARIS, August 30, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--Since your favor of July the 10th, mine have been of July
the 17th, 23d and 28th. The last enclosed a bill of exchange from Mr.
Grand, on Tessier for ¬£46, 17s. 10d. sterling, to answer General
Sullivan's bill for that sum. I hope it got safe to hand, though I have
been anxious about it, as it went by post, and my letters through that
channel sometimes miscarry.

From the separation of the Notables to the present moment, has been
perhaps the most interesting interval ever known in this country. The
propositions of the government, approved by the Notables, were precious
to the nation, and have been in an honest course of execution, some of
them being carried into effect, and others preparing. Above all, the
establishment of the Provincial Assemblies, some of which have begun
their sessions, bid fair to be the instrument for circumscribing the
power of the crown, and raising the people into consideration. The
election given to them, is what will do this. Though the minister, who
proposed these improvements, seems to have meant them as the price of
the new supplies, the game has been so played, as to secure the
improvements to the nation, without securing the price. The Notables
spoke softly on the subject of the additional supplies. But the
parliament took them up roundly, refused to register the edicts for the
new taxes, till compelled in a bed of justice, and suffered themselves
to be transferred to Troyes, rather than withdraw their opposition. It
is urged principally against the King, that his revenue is one hundred
and thirty millions more than that of his predecessor was, and yet he
demands one hundred and twenty millions further. You will see this well
explained in the "Conference entre un ministre d'√àtat et un Conseiller
au parliment," which I send you, with some small pamphlets. In the
meantime, all tongues in Paris (and in France as it is said) have been
let loose, and never was a license of speaking against the government
exercised in London more freely or more universally. Caricatures,
placards, bons mots, have been indulged in by all ranks of people, and
I know of no well-attested instance of a single punishment. For some
time mobs of ten, twenty and thirty thousand people collected daily,
surrounded the parliament house, huzzaed the members, even entered the
doors and examined into their conduct, took the horses out of the
carriages of those who did well, and drew them home. The government
thought it prudent to prevent these, drew some regiments into the
neighborhood, multiplied the guards, had the streets constantly
patrolled by strong parties, suspended privileged places, forbade all
clubs, etc. The mobs have ceased; perhaps this may be partly owing to
the absence of parliament. The Count d'Artois, sent to hold a bed of
justice in the Cour des Aides, was hissed and hooted without reserve,
by the populace; the carriage of Madame de (I forget the name) in the
Queen's livery was stopped by the populace, under a belief that it was
Madame de Polignac, whom they would have insulted; the Queen, going to
the theatre at Versailles with Madame de Polignac, was received with a
general hiss. The King, long in the habit of drowning his cares in
wine, plunges deeper and deeper. The Queen cries, but sins on. The
Count d'Artois is detested, and Monsieur, the general favorite. The
Archbishop of Thoulouse is made minister principal, a virtuous,
patriotic, and able character. The Marechal de Castries retired
yesterday, notwithstanding strong solicitations to remain in office.
The Marechal de Segur retired at the same time, prompted to it by the
court. Their successors are not yet known. Monsieur de St. Priest goes
ambassador to Holland, in the room of Verac, transferred to
Switzerland, and the Count de Moustier goes to America, in the room of
the Chevalier de La Luzerne, who has a promise of the first vacancy.
These nominations are not yet made formally, but they are decided on,
and the parties are ordered to prepare for their destination.

As it has been long since I have had a confidential conveyance to you,
I have brought together the principal facts from the adjournment of the
Notables to the present moment, which, as you will perceive from their
nature, required a confidential conveyance. I have done it the rather,
because, though you will have heard many of them, and seen them in the
public papers, yet, floating in the mass of lies which constitute the
atmosphere of London and Paris, you may not have been sure of their
truth; and I have mentioned every truth of any consequence, to enable
you to stamp as false, the facts pretermitted. I think that in the
course of three months, the royal authority has lost, and the rights of
the nation gained, as much ground by a revolution of public opinion
only, as England gained in all her civil wars under the Stuarts. I
rather believe, too, they will retain the ground gained, because it is
defended by the young and the middle aged, in opposition to the old
only. The first party increases, and the latter diminishes daily, from
the course of nature. You may suppose, that in this situation, war
would be unwelcome to France. She will surely avoid it, if not forced
into it by the courts of London and Berlin. If forced, it is probable
she will change the system of Europe totally, by an alliance with the
two empires, to whom nothing would be more desirable. In the event of
such a coalition, not only Prussia, but the whole European world must
receive from them their laws. But France will probably endeavor to
preserve the present system, if it can be done, by sacrificing to a
certain degree, the pretensions of the Patriotic party in Holland. But
of all these matters, you can judge, in your position, where less
secrecy is observed, better than I can.

I have news from America as late as July the 19th. Nothing had
transpired from the federal convention. I am sorry they began their
deliberations by so abominable a precedent as that of tying up the
tongues of their members. Nothing can justify this example but the
innocence of their intentions, and ignorance of the value of public
discussions. I have no doubt that all their other measures will be good
and wise. It is really an assembly of demigods. General Washington was
of opinion, that they should not separate till October.

I have the honor to be, with every sentiment of friendship and respect,
dear Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MONSIEUR LE COMTE DE MONTMORIN.

PARIS, September 8, 1787.


SIR,--I had the honor of addressing your Excellency on the 3d of July,
some observations on the letter of Monsieur de Calonnes, of October
22d, 1786, relative to the commerce of France with the United States of
America; of proposing to it some small amendments, and of expressing a
wish that it might be put into such a form as would secure its
execution. Monsieur de Villedeuil, then Comptroller General was pleased
to inform me that the Farmers General had received orders on the first
of April, 1787, to conform themselves to the decisions notified in that
letter, and that on the 5th of the same month they had given orders not
to levy "sur les _huiles_ et autres produits de la _peche Americane_
que les droits mentionnes dans la lettre." This expression, restrained
to the produce of the _fisheries_, with recent information received
from the American agent at Havre, make me apprehensive that the ancient
duties are still demanded on all other objects, and induce me to repeat
to your Excellency my request that the letter of M. de Calonnes may be
put into such form as will insure its execution and stability. In my
letter of July 25th, I took the liberty of proposing that timely
measures might be adopted for encouraging the direct importation of the
tobacco of the United States into this Kingdom when the order of Bernis
should be expired, and that in the meantime that order might be
strictly executed. A great accumulation of tobaccos in the seaports of
France, and a refusal of the Farmers General to purchase any more, on
the pretence that they have purchased the whole quantity required by
government, excites discontent among the merchants. It is their opinion
that the Farms have not complied with the order of Bernis. As the
government was pleased to desire the publication of that order to
induce the merchants to bring tobaccos here, it would be very
satisfactory to make known also the execution of that order. If the
Farms can verify that they have strictly executed it, all discontent
will cease and the merchants become sensible that the present glut is
occasioned by their importing too much. On the other hand, if it shall
appear, from the list of purchases made by the Farms, or from other
evidence, that they have not purchased the whole quantity on the
conditions prescribed by government, they will doubtless be instructed
to do it, and that too without delay, as the duration of the contract
with Mr. Morris, and of the order of Bernis, formed on that, will soon
expire.

A parcel of gazettes and magazines sent to me from America, for my own
use, and detained in the syndic chamber, obliges me to trouble your
Excellency for an order for their delivery.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem and
respect, your Excellency's most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MONSIEUR LIMOSIN.

PARIS, Sept. 9, 1787.


SIR,--Immediately on the receipt of your favor of the 31st of August, I
waited on the person who is charged with the superintendence of the
conduct of the Farms, and informed him that the customhouse officers
had required the ancient duties on a cargo of pearlash, arrived at
Havre. He observed to me that the duties promised to be abolished by
the King were only those due to himself or the Farms; but that there
were _droits loceaux_, which he could not abolish; that the officers of
the customs might have demanded the droits loceaux, but that it was
impossible they should have demanded any other duties. If they have
done so, I will beg the favor of you to send me such evidence of the
demand as will enable me to press for a proper notice of the Farms, if
they have failed to give orders, or a punishment of the officer, if he
has failed to obey them.

No further changes in the government since my last. The office of
Directeur du tresor royal was offered to M. de La Borde and refused by
him. Had no accident intervened, I think the affairs of the Dutch would
have been arranged without producing any war immediately. They are even
at this moment in a train of negotiation. But, in the meantime, a war
has broke out between the Russians and Turks. We have no news yet of
any action, but the Turks have imprisoned the Russian Ambassador at
Constantinople, and no hope is entertained of preventing hostilities.
Considering the situation of things in Europe, it seems inevitable that
this fire must spread over the whole of it. The utmost that can be
hoped, in my opinion, is that the season is so far advanced as that the
other powers of Europe may not be drawn into the vortex of hostilities
till the ensuing spring. The desire of government to prevent a war,
might make it disagreeable to them to see this opinion published. I
will pray you, therefore, to make use of it only for your own
government, and that of the Americans concerned in commerce with your
port. I shall make the same communication to our agents at Nantes and
Bordeaux. I have the honor to be, with much esteem, Sir, your most
obedient and most humble servant.




TO MR. T. BLAKE.

PARIS, Sept. 9, 1787.


SIR,--Congress do not grant their sea-letters for the East Indies, but
to ships belonging to citizens of the United States, and navigated by
officers and seamen of the United States. Even the cargo must also
belong to their own citizens. Nor can these letters be obtained but on
an application to Congress themselves, whereupon they appoint a
committee of their own body to enquire into the circumstances relative
to the vessel, cargo and crew, and on their report of the fact, they
grant or refuse the passport.

I am, with much respect, Sir, your most obedient humble servant.




TO MR. BONDFIELD.

PARIS, September 9, 1787.


SIR,--The affairs of Holland, though at one moment they had threatened
a war, had got into a hopeful train of accommodation, when all of a
sudden a war is kindled between the Russians and Turks. The latter have
imprisoned the Russian Ambassador resident with them, which you know is
their manner of declaring war; and though no news of actual hostilities
is yet arrived, every body considers them as inevitable. In the present
state of Europe, a spark dropped anywhere must kindle the whole. The
only thing to be hoped is that the advance of the season may prevent
the other powers from being drawn into the vortex of hostilities, till
the next spring. But this cannot be depended on. Government here would
still wish for peace, and may see disagreeably the publication of any
opinion unfriendly to their wish. I will beg of you, therefore, to make
use of this for your own information only, and that of the persons
concerned in our commerce from your port. My duty leads me to care of
them, and my desire to give no offence makes me wish to give no further
alarm. I make the same communication to the ports of Nantes, L'Orient,
and Havre. I am, with much esteem, Sir, your most obedient humble
servant.




TO MONSIEUR DUMAS.

PARIS, September 10, 1787.


SIR,--I am honored with your favor of the 5th instant, and will forward
the letter to Mr. Jay by the packet-boat which sails the 25th of this
month. I am sorry for the situation in which Mr. Grand's refusal to
make further advances has placed you. I know its pain, because I
participate of it. The aspect of your affairs has also been
discouraging. Perhaps the war kindled between Russia and Turkey may
engage your friends, of necessity in measures they wished to avoid, and
may ultimately relieve you. Our Federal Convention is likely to sit
till October; there is a general disposition through the States to
adopt what they shall propose, and we may be assured their propositions
will be wise, as a more able assembly never sat in America. Happily for
us, that when we find our constitutions defective and insufficient to
secure the happiness of our people, we can assemble with all the
coolness of philosophers, and set it to rights, while every other
nation on earth must have recourse to arms to amend or to restore their
constitutions. The sale of our western lands begins this month. I hope
from this measure a very speedy reduction of our national debt. It can
only be applied to pay off the principal, being irrevocably made a
sinking fund for that purpose. I have the honor to be, with much esteem
and respect, Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO DON FRANCISCO CHIAPPI.

PARIS, September 15, 1787.


SIR,--I have lately received from Mr. Jay, Secretary for foreign
affairs to the United States of America, the enclosed letter from
Congress to his Majesty the Emperor (whom God preserve), and their
ratification of the treaty between his Majesty (whom God preserve) and
the United States, together with an instruction to forward them to you,
to be delivered into the hands of his Majesty (whom God preserve). I am
at the same time to ask the favor of you to deliver the inclosed letter
to Taher Ben Abdelkack Fennish.

Mr. Jay also informs me that Congress had confirmed Mr. Barclay's
appointment of yourself to be their agent at Morocco, of Don Joseph
Chiappi to be their agent at Mogador, and Don Girolamo Chiappi to be
their agent at Tangier, with which agents it was their desire that
their ministers at Versailles and London should regularly correspond;
that want of time prevented his having and sending to me the certified
copies of these acts by that opportunity, but that he would do it by
the next. It will be with singular pleasure that I shall be
instrumental in forwarding to you these testimonies of the sense which
Congress entertains of your personal merit, and of your dispositions to
be useful to the citizens of America.

In the meantime, I shall be very happy to receive from you such
communications, from time to time, as may be interesting to either
nation, and will avail myself of every occasion of making
communications of the same nature to you, and of assuring you of those
sentiments of esteem and respect with which I have the honor to be,
Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.



