
TO MR. GEORGE WYTHE.

PARIS, Sept. 16, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I am now to acknowledge the receipt of your favors of Dec.
the 13th and 22d, 1786, and of Jan., 1787. These should not have been
so long unanswered, but that they arrived during my absence on a
journey of between three and four months through the southern parts of
France, and northern of Italy. In the latter country, my time allowed
me to go no farther than Turin, Milan, and Genoa: consequently, I
scarcely got into classical ground. I took with me some of the
writings, in which endeavors have been made to investigate the passage
of Annibal over the Alps, and was just able to satisfy myself, from a
view of the country, that the descriptions given of his march are not
sufficiently particular to enable us, at this day, even to guess at his
track across the Alps. In architecture, painting, sculpture, I found
much amusement; but more than all, in their agriculture, many objects
of which might be adopted with us to great advantage. I am persuaded,
there are many parts of our lower country where the olive tree might be
raised, which is assuredly the richest gift of heaven. I can scarcely
except bread. I see this tree supporting thousands among the Alps,
where there is not soil enough to make bread for a single family. The
caper too, might be cultivated with us. The fig we do raise. I do not
speak of the vine, because it is the parent of misery. Those who
cultivate it are always poor, and he who would employ himself with us
in the culture of corn, cotton, &c., can procure, in exchange for them,
much more wine, and better than he could raise by its direct culture.

I sent you formerly copies of the documents on the Tagliaferro family,
which I had received from Mr. Febroni. I now send the originals. I have
procured for you a copy of Polybius, the best edition; but the best
edition of Vitruvius, which is with the commentaries of Ticinus, is not
to be got here. I have sent to Holland for it. In the meantime, the
Polybius comes in a box containing books for Peter Carr, and for some
of my friends in Williamsburg and its vicinities. I have taken the
liberty of addressing the box to you. It goes to New York in the packet
boat which carries this letter, and will be forwarded to you by water,
by Mr. Madison. Its freight to New York is paid here. The
transportation from thence to Williamsburg will be demanded of you, and
shall stand as the equivalent to the cost of Polybius and Vitruvius, if
you please. The difference either way will not be worth the trouble of
raising and transmitting accounts. I send you herewith, a state of the
contents of the box, and for whom each article is. Among these are
some, as you will perceive, of which I ask your acceptance. It is a
great comfort to me, that while here, I am able to furnish some
amusement to my friends, by sending them such productions of genius,
ancient and modern, as might otherwise escape them; and I hope they
will permit me to avail myself of the occasion while it lasts.

This world is going all to war. I hope ours will remain clear of it. It
is already declared between the Turks and Russians, and considering the
present situation of Holland, it cannot fail to spread itself all over
Europe. Perhaps it may not be till next spring, that the other powers
will be engaged in it: nor is it as yet clear how they will arrange
themselves. I think it not impossible that France and the two empires
may join against all the rest. The Patriotic party in Holland will be
saved by this, and the Turks sacrificed. The only thing which can
prevent the union of France and the two empires, is the difficulty of
agreeing about the partition of the spoils. Constantinople is the key
of Asia. Who shall have it? is the question. I cannot help looking
forward to the re-establishment of the Greeks as a people, and the
language of Homer becoming again a living language, as among possible
events. You have now with you Mr. Paradise, who can tell you how easily
the modern may be improved into the ancient Greek.

You ask me in your letter, what ameliorations I think necessary in our
federal constitution. It is now too late to answer the question, and it
would always have been presumption in me to have done it. Your own
ideas, and those of the great characters who were to be concerned with
you in these discussions, will give the law, as they ought to do, to us
all. My own general idea was, that the States should severally preserve
their sovereignty in whatever concerns themselves alone, and that
whatever may concern another State, or any foreign nation, should be
made a part of the federal sovereignty; that the exercise of the
federal sovereignty should be divided among three several bodies,
legislative, executive, and judiciary, as the State sovereignties are;
and that some peaceable means should be contrived, for the federal head
to force compliance on the part of the States. I have reflected on your
idea of wooden, or ivory diagrams, for the geometrical demonstrations.
I should think wood as good as ivory; and that in this case, it might
add to the improvement of the young gentlemen, that they should make
the figures themselves. Being furnished by a workman with a piece of
veneer, no other tool than a penknife and a wooden rule, would be
necessary. Perhaps pasteboards, or common cards, might be still more
convenient. The difficulty is, how to reconcile figures which must have
a very sensible breadth to our ideas of a mathematical line, which, as
it has neither breadth nor thickness, will revolt more at these than at
simple lines drawn on paper or slate. If, after reflecting on this
proposition, you would prefer having them made here, lay your commands
on me, and they shall be executed.

I return you a thousand thanks for your goodness to my nephew. After my
debt to you for whatever I am myself, it is increasing it too much to
interest yourself for his future fortune. But I know, that to you, a
consciousness of doing good is a luxury ineffable. You have enjoyed it
already, beyond all human measure, and that you may long live to enjoy
it, and to bless your country and friends, is the sincere prayer of him
who is, with every possible sentiment of esteem and respect, dear Sir,
your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MR. DAVID RITTENHOUSE.

PARIS, September 18, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I am now to acknowledge the receipt of your favors of April
the 14th, and June the 26th, as also of the second volume of the
transactions you were so kind as to send me. It would have been a
grateful present indeed, could you have accompanied them with a copy of
your observations on our western country. Besides the interest I feel
in that country in common with others, I have a particular one, as
having ventured so many crudities on that subject. A copy of these,
with some late corrections, I have put into a box of books sent to Mr.
Madison, and another for Mr. Hopkinson. I hope he will forward them to
you from New York. I have also put into the same box for you a
dissertation, by De la Sauvagere, on the spontaneous growth of shells.
When I was at Tours this summer, I inquired into the character of De la
Sauvagere, from a gentleman who had known him well. He told me he was a
person of talents, but of a heated imagination; however, that he might
be depended on for any facts advanced on his own knowledge. This
gentleman added, that he had seen such proofs of this growth of shells
in many parts of the country round Tours, as to convince him of the
truth of the fact; and that he has never seen any person, even the most
incredulous, quit those Falunieres but under the same conviction. After
all, I cannot say I give faith to it. It is so unlike the processes of
nature, to produce the same effect in two different ways, that I can
only bring myself to agree it is not impossible. I have added for you
the Connoissance des Temps for '88 and '89, and a copy of Fourcroi's
Chemistry, which is the best and most complete publication in that
line, which we have had for some time past. I shall be happy to receive
an account of your improvement in timepieces, as well as the third
volume of the transactions, when published. There are abundance of good
things in the second volume. But I must say there are several which
have not merit enough to be placed in such company. I think we should
be a little rigid in our admission of papers. It is the peculiar
privilege derived from our not being obliged to publish a volume in any
fixed period of time. A person here pretends to have discovered the
method of rendering sea-water potable, and has some respectable
certificates of its success. He has contrived a varnish, also, for
lining biscuit barrels, which preserves the biscuit good, and keeps it
free from insects. He asks money for his secrets, so we are not to know
them soon.

The affairs of Holland had got so far entangled as to leave little hope
that war could be avoided. In this situation, the Turks have declared
war against the Russians. This, I think, renders a general war
inevitable. Perhaps the European powers may take this winter to
determine which side each shall take. There is a possibility that an
alliance between France and the two empires may induce England and
Prussia to tread back their steps. In that case, the Patriotic party in
Holland will be peaceably placed at the head of their government. The
Turks will be driven out of Europe, their continental possessions
divided between Russia and the Emperor, and perhaps their islands and
Egypt allotted to France. These events seem possible at present. * * * *




TO THE HONORABLE THE COMMISSIONERS OF THE TREASURY.

PARIS, September 18, 1787.


GENTLEMEN,--Congress having thought proper, by their vote of July the
18th, to entrust me to take measures for the redemption of our captives
at Algiers, and to desire you to furnish the money necessary, it is
proper to state to you some data whereby you may judge what sum is
necessary. The French prisoners, last redeemed by the order of
Mathurins, cost somewhat less than four hundred dollars: but the
General of the order told me, that they had always been made to pay
more for foreign prisoners than their own. The smallest sum then, at
which we can expect ours, including redemption, clothing, feeding, and
transportation, will be five hundred dollars each. There are twenty of
them. Of course, ten thousand dollars is the smallest sum which can be
requisite. I think a larger sum should be set apart, as so much of it
as shall not be wanting for the prisoners, will remain for other uses.
As soon as you shall have notified me that the money is ready, I will
proceed to execute the order of Congress. I must add the injunctions of
the General of the Mathurins, that it be not made known that the public
interest themselves in the redemption of these prisoners, as that would
induce the Algerians to demand the most extravagant price. I have the
honor to be, with sentiments of the most profound respect, Gentlemen,
your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

PARIS, September 19, 1787.


SIR,--My last letters to you were of the 6th and 15th of August; since
which, I have been honored with yours of July the 24th, acknowledging
the receipt of mine of the 14th and 23d of February. I am anxious to
hear you have received that also of May the 4th, written from
Marseilles. According to the desires of Congress, expressed in their
vote confirming the appointments of Francisco, Giuseppa and Girolamo
Chiappi, their agents in Morocco, I have written letters to these
gentlemen, to begin a correspondence with them. To the first, I have
inclosed the ratification of the treaty with the Emperor of Morocco,
and shall send it either by our agent at Marseilles, who is now here,
or by the Count Daranda, who sets out for Madrid in a few days, having
relinquished his embassy here. I shall proceed on the redemption of our
captives at Algiers, as soon as the commissioners of the treasury shall
enable me, by placing the money necessary, under my orders. The
prisoners redeemed by the religious order of Mathurins, cost about four
hundred dollars each, and the General of the order told me, that they
had never been able to redeem foreigners on so good terms as their own
countrymen. Supposing that their redemption, clothing, feeding and
transportation, should amount to five hundred dollars each, there must
be, at least, a sum of ten thousand dollars set apart for this purpose.
Till this is done, I shall take no other step than the preparatory one,
of destroying at Algiers all idea of our intending to redeem the
prisoners. This, the General of the Mathurins told me, was
indispensably necessary, and that it must not, on any account,
transpire, that the public would interest themselves for their
redemption. This was rendered the more necessary, by the declaration of
the Dey to the Spanish consul, that he should hold him responsible, at
the Spanish price, for our prisoners, even for such as should die.
Three of them have died of the plague. By authorizing me to redeem at
the prices _usually_ paid by the European nations, Congress, I suppose,
could not mean the Spanish price, which is not only unusual, but
unprecedented, and would make our vessels the first object with those
pirates. I shall pay no attention, therefore, to the Spanish price,
unless further instructed. Hard as it may seem, I should think it
necessary not to let it be known even to the relations of the captives,
that we mean to redeem them.

I have the honor to enclose you a paper from the admiralty of
Guadaloupe, sent to me as a matter of form, and to be lodged, I
suppose, with our marine records. I enclose, also, a copy of a letter
from the Count de Florida Blanca to Mr. Carmichael, by which you will
perceive, they have referred the settlement of the claim of South
Carolina for the use of their frigate, to Mr. Gardoqui, and to the
Delegates of South Carolina in Congress.

I had the honor to inform you, in my last letter, of the parliament's
being transferred to Troyes. To put an end to the tumults in Paris,
some regiments were brought nearer, the patroles were strengthened and
multiplied, some mutineers punished by imprisonment: it produced the
desired effect. It is confidently believed, however, that the
parliament will be immediately recalled, the stamp tax and land tax
repealed, and other means devised of accommodating their receipts and
expenditures. Those supposed to be in contemplation, are a rigorous
levy of the old tax of the _deux vingtiËmes_, on the rich, who had, in
a great measure, withdrawn their property from it, as well as on the
poor, on whom it had principally fallen. This will greatly increase the
receipts; while they are proceeding on the other hand, to reform their
expenses far beyond what they had promised. It is said these
reformations will amount to eighty millions. Circumstances render these
measures more and more pressing. I mentioned to you in my last letter,
that the officer charged by the ministry to watch the motion of the
British squadron, had returned with information that it had sailed
westwardly. The fact was not true. He had formed his conclusion too
hastily, and thus led the ministry into error. The King of Prussia,
urged on by England, has pressed more and more the affairs of Holland,
and lately has given to the States General of Holland, four days only
to comply with his demand. This measure would, of itself, have rendered
it impossible for France to proceed longer in the line of accommodation
with Prussia. In the same moment, an event takes place, which seems to
render all attempt at accommodation idle. The Turks have declared war
against the Russians, and that under circumstances which exclude all
prospect of preventing its taking place. The King of Prussia having
deserted his ancient friends, there remains only France and Turkey,
perhaps Spain also, to oppose the two empires, Russia and England. By
such a piece of Quixotism, France might plunge herself into ruin with
the Turks and Dutch, but would save neither. But there is certainly a
confederacy secretly in contemplation, of which the public have not yet
the smallest suspicion; that is, between France and the two empires. I
think it sure that Russia has desired this, and that the Emperor, after
some hesitation, has acceded. It rests on this country to close. Her
indignation against the King of Prussia will be some spur. She will
thereby save her party in Holland, and only abandon the Turks to that
fate she cannot ward off, and which their precipitation has brought on
themselves, by the instigations of the English ambassador at the Porte,
and against the remonstrances of the French ambassador. Perhaps this
formidable combination, should it take place, may prevent the war of
the western powers, as it would seem that neither England nor Prussia
would carry their false calculations so far, as, with the aid of the
Turks only, to oppose themselves to such a force. In that case, the
Patriots of Holland would be peaceably established in the powers of
their government, and the war go on against the Turks only, who would
probably be driven from Europe. This new arrangement would be a total
change of the European system, and a favorable one for our friends. The
probability of a general war, in which this country will be engaged on
one side, and England on the other, has appeared to me sufficient to
justify my writing to our agents in the different ports of France, to
put our merchants on their guard, against risking their property in
French or English bottoms. The Emperor, instead of tracing back his
steps in Brabant, as was expected, has pursued the less honorable plan
of decoying his subjects thence by false pretences, to let themselves
be invested by his troops, and this done, he dictates to them his own
terms. Yet it is not certain the matter will end with that.

The Count de Moustier is nominated Minister Plenipotentiary to America;
and a frigate is ordered to Cherbourg, to carry him over. He will
endeavor to sail by the middle of the next month, but if any delay
should make him pass over the whole of October, he will defer his
voyage to the spring, being unwilling to take a winter passage.
Monsieur de St. Priest is sent Ambassador to Holland, in the room of
Monsieur de Verac, appointed to Switzerland. The Chevalier de Luzerne
might, I believe, have gone to Holland, but he preferred a general
promise of promotion, and the possibility that it might be to the court
of London. His prospects are very fair. His brother, the Count de la
Luzerne, (now Governor in the West Indies,) is appointed minister of
the marine, in the place of Monsieur de Castries, who has resigned. The
Archbishop of Thoulouse is appointed _ministre principale_, and his
brother, Monsieur de Brienne, minister of war, in the place of Monsieur
de Segur. The department of the Comptroller has had a very rapid
succession of tenants. From Monsieur de Calonnes it passed to Monsieur
de Forqueux, from him to Villedeuil, and from him to Lambert, who holds
it at present, but divided with a Monsieur Cabarrus, (whom I believe
you knew in Spain,) who is named _Directeur du trÈsor_ _royal_, the
office into which M. Neckar came at first. I had the honor to inform
you, that before the departure of the Count de Luzerne to his
government in the West Indies, I had pressed on him the patronage of
our trade with the French islands; that he appeared well disposed, and
assured me he would favor us as much as his instructions, and the laws
of the colonies, would permit. I am in hopes these dispositions will be
strengthened by his residence in the islands, and that his acquaintance
among the people there, will be an additional motive to favor them.
Probably they will take advantage of his appointment, to press
indulgences in commerce with us. The ministry is of a liberal
complexion, and well disposed to us. The war may add to the motives for
opening their islands to other resources for their subsistence, and for
doing what may be agreeable to us. It seems to me, at present, then,
that the moment of the arrival of the Count de La Luzerne, will be the
moment for trying to obtain a freer access to their islands. It would
be very material to do this, if possible, in a permanent way, that is
to say, by treaty. But I know of nothing we have to offer in
equivalent. Perhaps the payment of our debt to them might be made use
of as some inducement, while they are so distressed for money. Yet the
borrowing the money in Holland will be rendered more difficult by the
same event, in proportion as it will increase the demand for money by
other powers.

The gazettes of Leyden and France to this date are enclosed, together
with some pamphlets on the internal affairs of this country.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem and
respect, Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO CHARLES THOMPSON.

PARIS, Sept. 20, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--Your favor of April the 28th did not come to my hands till
the first instant. Unfortunately, the box of plants, which were a day
too late to come by the April packet, missed the packet of June the
10th also, and only came by that of July the 25th. They are not yet
arrived at Paris, but I expect them daily. I am sensible of your kind
attention to them, and that as you were leaving New York, you took the
course which bade fair to be the best. That they were forgotten in the
hands in which you placed them, was probably owing to too much
business, and more important. I have desired Mr. Madison to refund to
you the money you were so kind as to advance for me. The delay of your
letter will apologize for this delay of the repayment. I thank you also
for the extract of the letter you were so kind as to communicate to me,
on the antiquities found in the western country. I wish that the
persons who go thither would make very exact descriptions of what they
see of that kind, without forming any theories. The moment a person
forms a theory, his imagination sees, in every object, only the traits
which favor that theory. But it is too early to form theories on those
antiquities. We must wait with patience till more facts are collected.
I wish your Philosophical Society would collect exact descriptions of
the several monuments as yet known, and insert them naked in their
Transactions, and continue their attention to those hereafter to be
discovered. Patience and observation may enable us in time, to solve
the problem, whether those who formed the scattering monuments in our
western country, were colonies sent off from Mexico, or the founders of
Mexico itself? Whether both were the descendants or the progenitors of
the Asiatic red men? The Mexican tradition, mentioned by Dr. Robertson,
is an evidence, but a feeble one, in favor of the one opinion. The
number of languages radically different, is a strong evidence in favor
of the contrary one. There is an American by the name of Ledyard, he
who was with Captain Cook on his last voyage, and wrote an account of
that voyage, who has gone to St. Petersburg; from thence he was to go
to Kamschatka; to cross over thence to the northwest coast of America,
and to penetrate through the main continent, to our side of it. He is a
person of ingenuity and information. Unfortunately, he has too much
imagination. However, if he escapes safety, he will give us new,
curious and useful information. I had a letter from him, dated last
March, when he was about to leave St. Petersburg on his way to
Kamschatka.

With respect to the inclination of the strata of rocks, I had observed
them between the Blue Ridge and North Mountains in Virginia, to be
parallel with the pole of the earth. I observed the same thing in most
instances in the Alps, between Cette and Turin; but in returning along
the precipices of the Apennines, where they hang over the
Mediterranean, their direction was totally different and various; and
you mention that in our western country they are horizontal. This
variety proves they have not been formed by subsidence, as some writers
of theories of the earth have pretended; for then they should always
have been in circular strata, and concentric. It proves, too, that they
have not been formed by the rotation of the earth on its axis, as might
have been suspected, had all these strata been parallel with that axis.
They may, indeed, have been thrown up by explosions, as Whitehurst
supposes, or have been the effect of convulsions. But there can be no
proof of the explosion, nor is it probable that convulsions have
deformed every spot of the earth. It is now generally agreed that rock
grows, and it seems that it grows in layers in every direction, as the
branches of trees grow in all directions. Why seek further the solution
of this phenomenon? Everything in nature decays. If it were not
reproduced then by growth, there would be a chasm.

I remember you asked me, in a former letter, whether the steam mill in
London was turned by the steam immediately, or by the intermediate
agency of water raised by the steam. When I was in London, Boulton made
a secret of his mill. Therefore, I was permitted to see it only
superficially. I saw no water wheels, and, therefore, supposed none. I
answered you, accordingly, that there were none. But when I was at
Nismes, I went to see the steam mill there, and they showed it to me in
all the parts. I saw that their steam raised water, and that this water
turned a wheel. I expressed my doubts of the necessity of the
inter-agency of water, and that the London mill was without it. But
they supposed me mistaken; perhaps I was so; I have had no opportunity
since of clearing up the doubt.

                 *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

I had a letter from Mr. Churchman, but not developing his plan of
knowing the longitude, fully. I wrote him what was doubted about it, so
far as we could conjecture what it was.

I am, with very great and sincere esteem, dear Sir, your friend and
servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

PARIS, Sept. 22, 1787.


SIR,--The letters of which the enclosed are copies, are this moment
received, and as there is a possibility that they may reach Havre
before the packet sails, I have the honor of enclosing them to you.
They contain a promise of reducing the duties on tar, pitch and
turpentine, and that the government will interest itself with the city
of Rouen, to reduce the local duty on potash. By this you will perceive
that we are getting on a little in this business, though under their
present embarrassments, it is difficult to procure the attention of the
ministers to it. The parliament has enregistered the edict of a
rigorous levy of the _deux vingtiËmes_. As this was proposed by the
King in lieu of the impost territorial, there is no doubt now that the
latter, with the stamp tax, will be immediately repealed. There can be
no better proof of the revolution in the public opinion, as to the
powers of the monarch, and of the force, too, of that opinion. Six
weeks ago, we saw the King displaying the plentitude of his
omnipotence, as hitherto conceived, to enforce these two acts. At this
day, he is forced to retract them by the public voice; for as to the
opposition of the parliament, that body is too little esteemed to
produce this effect in any case where the public do not throw
themselves into the same scale.

I have the honor to be, with the most perfect esteem and respect, Sir,
your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

PARIS, Sept. 22, 1787.


SIR,--When I had the honor of addressing you this morning, intelligence
was handing about, which I did not think well enough authenticated to
communicate to you. As it is now ascertained, I avail myself of the
chance that another post may yet reach Havre before the departure of
the packet. This will depend on the wind, which has for some days been
unfavorable. I must premise, that this court, about ten days ago,
declared, by their ChargÈ des Affaires in Holland, that if the Prussian
troops continued to menace Holland with an invasion, his Majesty was
determined, in quality of ally, to succor that province. An _official_
letter from the Hague, of the 18th instant, assures that the Prussian
army entered the territory of Holland on the 15th, that most of the
principal towns had submitted, some after firing a gun or two, others
without resistance; that the Rhingrave de Salm had evacuated Utretcht,
with part of the troops under his command, leaving behind him one
hundred and forty-four pieces of cannon, with great warlike stores;
that the standard of Orange was hoisted everywhere; that no other
cockade could be worn at the Hague; that the States General were to
assemble that night for reinstating the Stadtholder in all his rights.
The letter concludes, "we have this moment intelligence that Woerden
has capitulated; so that Amsterdam remains without defence." So far the
letter. We know, otherwise, that Monsieur de St. Priest, who had set
out on his embassy to the Hague, has stopped at Antwerp, not choosing
to proceed further till new orders. This court has been completely
deceived, first by its own great desire to avoid a war, and secondly by
calculating that the King of Prussia would have acted on principles of
common sense, which would surely have dictated, that a power, lying
between the jaws of Russia and Austria, should not separate itself from
France, unless, indeed, he had assurances of dispositions in those two
powers, which are not supposed to exist. On the contrary, I am
persuaded that they ask the alliance of France, whom we suppose to be
under hesitations between her reluctance to abandon the Turks, her
jealousy of increasing by their spoils, the power of the two empires,
and the inability to oppose them. If they cannot obtain her alliance,
they will surely join themselves to England and Prussia.

Official advices are received, that the first division of the Russian
army has passed the Borysthenes into the Polish Ukraine, and is
marching towards the frontiers of Turkey. Thus, we may consider the
flames of war as completely kindled in two distinct parts of this
quarter of the globe, and that though France and England have not yet
engaged themselves in it, the probabilities are, that they will do it.

I have the honor to be, with the most perfect esteem and respect, Sir,
your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MR. CARNES.

PARIS, September 22, 1787.


SIR,--I am honored by your favor of the 17th instant. A war between
France and England does not necessarily engage America in it; and I
think she will be disposed rather to avail herself of the advantages of
a neutral power. By the former usage of nations, the goods of a friend
were safe, though taken in an enemy bottom, and those of an enemy were
lawful prize, though found in a free bottom. But in our treaties with
France, etc., we have established the simpler rule, that a free bottom
makes free goods, and an enemy bottom, enemy goods. The same rule has
been adopted by the treaty of armed neutrality between Russia, Sweden,
Denmark, Holland and Portugal, and assented to by France and Spain.
Contraband goods, however, are always excepted, so that they may still
be seized; but the same powers have established that naval stores are
not contraband; and this may be considered now as the law of nations.
Though England acquiesced under this during the late war, rather than
draw on herself the neutral powers, yet she never acceded to the new
principle, and her obstinacy on this point, is what has prevented the
late renewal of her treaty with Russia. On the commencement of a new
war, this principle will probably be insisted on by the neutral powers,
whom we may suppose to be Sweden, Denmark, Portugal, America, and
perhaps Spain. Quere; if England will again acquiesce. Supposing these
details might be useful to you, I have taken the liberty of giving
them, and of assuring you of the esteem with which I am, Sir, your very
humble servant.




TO MONSIEUR LIMOZIN.

PARIS, September 22, 1787.


SIR,--I must trouble you with another letter to Mr. Jay, to be
delivered to Monsieur Bourgoin on board the packet, which I hope will
not be sailed before it gets to your hands, as the letter is of extreme
importance. It is to inform Congress that official advice is just
received here that the Prussian troops entered the territory of Holland
on the 15th instant; that most of the principal towns had submitted,
that Utrecht was evacuated by the Rhingrave de Salm, and Woerden
capitulated, so that Amsterdam remained without defence. M. de St.
Priest had stopped at Antwerp and waited further orders. We know also,
that the first division of the Russian army has passed the Borysthenes
into the Polish Ukraine, and is marching towards the frontiers of
Turkey. War then is well kindled in those two quarters. Monsieur
Cabarus is arrived at Paris, but will not accept the appointment
offered him unless they will adopt his plans. On this there is
hesitation; so that it is not certain he will come in.

I have received your favor of the 20th, and shall make proper use of
its contents. Should the packet be sailed, I will pray you to send my
letter by the first of the vessels which you mention bound for
Philadelphia. I am, with great esteem, Sir, your most obedient humble
servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

PARIS, September 24, 1787.


SIR,--The times are now so critical, that every day brings something
new and important, not known the day before. Observing the wind still
unfavorable, I am in hopes the packet may not sail to-morrow, and that
this letter may be at Havre in time for that conveyance. Mr. Eden has
waited on Count Montmorin to inform him, officially, that England must
consider its convention with France, relative to the giving notice of
its naval armament, as at an end, and that they are arming generally.
This is considered here as a declaration of war. The Dutch ambassador
told me yesterday, that he supposed the Prussian troops probably in
possession of the Hague. I asked him if it would interrupt the course
of business, commercial or banking, in Amsterdam; and particularly,
whether our depot of money there was safe. He said, the people of
Amsterdam would be surely so wise as to submit, when they should see
that they could not oppose the Stadtholder; therefore he supposed our
depot safe, and that there would be no interruption of business. It is
the hour of the departure of the post; so I have only time to add
assurances of the respect and esteem with which I have the honor to be,
Sir, your most obedient humble servant.




TO JOHN ADAMS.

PARIS, September 28, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I received your favor by Mr. Cutting, and thank you
sincerely for the copy of your book. The departure of a packet boat,
which always gives me full employment for some time before, has only
permitted me to look into it a little. I judge of it from the first
volume, which I thought formed to do a great deal of good. The first
principle of a good government, is certainly, a distribution of its
powers into executive, judiciary and legislative, and a subdivision of
the latter into two or three branches. It is a good step gained, when
it is proved that the English constitution, acknowledged to be better
than all which have preceded it, is only better in proportion as it has
approached nearer to this distribution of powers. From this, the last
step is easy, to show by a comparison of our constitutions with that of
England, how much more perfect they are. The article of Confederations
is certainly worthy of your pen. It would form a most interesting
addition, to show, what have been the nature of the Confederations
which have existed hitherto, what were their excellences, and what
their defects. A comparison of ours with them would be to the advantage
of ours, and would increase the veneration of our countrymen for it. It
is a misfortune that they do not sufficiently know the value of their
constitutions, and how much happier they are rendered by them, than any
other people on earth, by the governments under which they live.

You know all that has happened in the United Netherlands. You know also
that our friends, Van Staphorsts, will be among the most likely to
become objects of severity, if any severities should be exercised. Is
the money in their hands entirely safe? If it is not, I am sure you
have already thought of it. Are we to suppose the game already up, and
that the Stadtholder is to be re-established, perhaps erected into a
monarch, without the country lifting a finger in opposition to it. If
so, it is a lesson the more for us. In fact, what a crowd of lessons do
the present miseries of Holland teach us? Never to have an hereditary
officer of any sort: never to let a citizen ally himself with kings:
never to call in foreign nations to settle domestic differences: never
to suppose that any nation will expose itself to war for us, etc. Still
I am not without hopes that a good rod is in soak for Prussia, and that
England will feel the end of it. It is known to some, that Russia made
propositions to the Emperor and France, for acting in concert; that the
Emperor consents, and has disposed four camps of one hundred and eighty
thousand men, from the limits of Turkey to those of Prussia. This court
hesitates, or rather its Premier hesitates; for the Queen, Montmorin
and Breteuil, are for the measure. Should it take place, all may yet
come to rights, except for the Turks, who must retire from Europe, and
this they must do, were France Quixotic enough to undertake to support
them. We, I hope, shall be left free to avail ourselves of the
advantages of neutrality; and yet, much I fear, the English, or rather
their stupid King, will force us out of it. For thus I reason. By
forcing us into the war against them, they will be engaged in an
expensive land war, as well as a sea war. Common sense dictates,
therefore, that they should let us remain neuter: _ergo_ they will not
let us remain neuter. I never yet found any other general rule for
foretelling what they will do, but that of examining what they ought
not to do.

                 *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

I have the honor to be, with my best respects to Mrs. Adams, and
sentiments of perfect esteem and regard to yourself, Sir, your most
obedient, and most humble servant.




TO COLONEL SMITH.

PARIS, September 28, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I have duly received your favor by Mr. Cutting. I had before
had a transient acquaintance with him, and knew him to be sensible.
Your recommendation is always a new merit. I really think, and had
taken the liberty some time ago of hinting to Congress, that they would
do well to have a diplomatic character at Lisbon. There is no country
whose commerce is more interesting to us. I wish Congress would
correspond to the wishes of that court, in sending a person there, and
to mine, in sending yourself. For I confess, I had rather see you there
than at London, because I doubt whether it be honorable for us to keep
anybody at London, unless they keep some person at New York. Of all
nations on earth, they require to be treated with the most hauteur.
They require to be kicked into common good manners. You ask, if you
shall say anything to Sullivan about the bill. No. Only that it is
paid. I have within these two or three days, received letters from him
explaining the matter. It was really for the skin and bones of the
moose, as I had conjectured. It was my fault, that I had not given him
a rough idea of the expense I would be willing to incur for them. He
had made the acquisition an object of a regular campaign, and that too
of a winter one. The troops he employed sallied forth, as he writes me,
in the month of March--much snow--a herd attacked--one killed--in the
wilderness--a road to cut twenty miles--to be drawn by hand from the
frontiers to his house--bones to be cleaned, etc., etc., etc. In fine,
he puts himself to an infinitude of trouble, more than I meant: he did
it cheerfully, and I feel myself really under obligations to him. That
the tragedy might not want a proper catastrophe, the box, bones, and
all, are lost; so that this chapter of Natural History will still
remain a blank. But I have written to him not to send me another. I
will leave it for my successor to fill up, whenever I shall make my bow
here. The purchase for Mrs. Adams shall be made, and sent by Mr.
Cutting. I shall always be happy to receive her commands. Petit shall
be made happy by her praises of his last purchase for her. I must refer
you to Mr. Adams for the news. Those respecting the Dutch you know as
well as I. Nor should they be written but with the pen of Jeremiah.
Adieu mon ami! Yours affectionately.




TO MONSIEUR LE COMTE DE BUFFON.

PARIS, October 3, 1787.


SIR,--I had-the honor of informing you, some time ago, that I had
written to some of my friends in America, desiring they would send me
such of the spoils of the moose, caribou, elk and deer, as might throw
light on that class of animals; but more particularly, to send me the
complete skeleton, skin and horns of the moose, in such condition as
that the skin might be sewed up and stuffed, on its arrival here. I am
happy to be able to present to you at this moment, the bones and skin
of a moose, the horns of another individual of the same species, the
horns of the caribou, the elk, the deer, the spiked horned buck, and
the roebuck of America. They all come from New Hampshire and
Massachusetts and were received by me yesterday. I give you their
popular names, as it rests with yourself to decide their real names.
The skin of the moose was dressed with the hair on, but a great deal of
it has come off, and the rest is ready to drop off. The horns of the
elk are remarkably small. I have certainly seen some of them which
would have weighed five or six times as much. This is the animal which
we call elk in the southern parts of America, and of which I have given
some description in the Notes on Virginia, of which I had the honor of
presenting you a copy. I really doubt whether the flat-horned elk
exists in America; and I think this may be properly classed with the
elk, the principal difference being in the horns. I have seen the daim,
the cerf, the chevreuil of Europe. But the animal we call elk, and
which may be distinguished as the round-horned elk, is very different
from them. I have never seen the brand-hirtz or cerf d'Ardennes, nor
the European elk. Could I get a sight of them, I think I should be able
to say which of them the American elk resembles most, as I am tolerably
well acquainted with that animal. I must observe also, that the horns
of the deer, which accompany these spoils, are not of the fifth or
sixth part of the weight of some that I have seen. This individual has
been of three years of age, according to our method of judging. I have
taken measures, particularly, to be furnished with large horns of our
elk and our deer, and therefore beg of you not to consider those now
sent, as furnishing a specimen of their ordinary size. I really suspect
you will find that the moose, the round-horned elk, and the American
deer, are species not existing in Europe. The moose is, perhaps, of a
new class. I wish these spoils, Sir, may have the merit of adding
anything new to the treasures of nature, which have so fortunately come
under your observation, and of which she seems to have given you the
key: they will in that case be some gratification to you, which it will
always be pleasing to me to have procured; having the honor to be, with
sentiments of the most perfect esteem and respect, Sir, your most
obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MR. C. W. F. DUMAS.

PARIS, October 4, 1787.


SIR,--I received your favor of the 23d of September, two days ago. That
of the 28th and 29th, was put in my hands this morning. I immediately
waited on the ambassadors, ordinary and extraordinary, of the United
Netherlands, and also on the envoy of Prussia, and asked their good
offices to have an efficacious protection extended to your person, your
family, and your effects, observing that the United States know no
party, but are the friends and allies of the United Netherlands as a
nation, and would expect from their friendship, that the person who is
charged with their affairs until the arrival of a Minister, should be
covered from all insult and injury which might be offered him by a
lawless mob; well assured that their Minister residing with Congress,
would, on all occasions, receive the same. They have been so good as to
promise me, each, that he will in his first despatches press this
matter on the proper power, and give me reason to hope that it will be
efficacious for your safety. I will transmit your letter to Mr. Jay by
the Count de Moustier, who sets out within a week for New York, as
Minister Plenipotentiary for France, in that country. I sincerely
sympathize in your sufferings, and wish that what I have done may
effect an end to them, being with much respect and esteem, Sir, your
most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO HIS EXCELLENCY PRESIDENT SULLIVAN.

PARIS, October 5, 1787.


SIR,--I have now before me your several favors of April the 16th, 26th,
and 30th, and of May the 9th and 29th, and received also a few days ago
the box containing the skin, bones, and horns of the moose, and other
animals, which your Excellency has been so kind as to take so much
trouble to obtain and forward. They were all in good enough condition,
except that a good deal of the hair of the moose had fallen off.
However, there remained still enough to give a good idea of the animal,
and I am in hopes Monsieur de Buffon will be able to have him stuffed,
and placed on his legs in the King's Cabinet. He was in the country
when I sent the box to the Cabinet, so that I have as yet no answer
from him. I am persuaded he will find the moose to be a different
animal from any he had described in his work. I am equally persuaded
that our elk and deer are animals of a different species from any
existing in Europe. Unluckily, the horns of them now received are
remarkably small. However, I have taken measures to procure some from
Virginia. The moose is really a valuable acquisition; but the skeletons
of the other animals would not be worth the expense they would occasion
to me, and still less the trouble to you. Of this, you have been
already so kind as to take a great deal more than I intended to have
given you, and I beg you to accept my sincere thanks. Should a pair of
large horns of the elk or deer fall into your way by accident, I would
thank you to keep them till some vessel should be coming directly from
your nearest port to Havre. So also of very large horns of the moose,
for I understand they are sometimes enormously large indeed. But I
would ask these things only on condition they should occasion you no
trouble, and me little expense.

You will have known that war is commenced between the Turks and
Russians, and that the Prussian troops have entered Holland, and
reinstated the Stadtholder. It is said that even Amsterdam has
capitulated. Yet is it possible, and rather probable, this country will
engage in a war to restore the Patriots. If they do, it will be the
most general one long known in Europe. We, I hope, shall enjoy the
blessings of a neutrality, and probably see England once more humbled.
I am, with great esteem and respect, your Excellency's most obedient,
and most humble servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

PARIS, October 8, 1787.


SIR,--I had the honor of writing you on the 19th of September, twice on
the 22d, and again on the 24th. The two first went by the packet, the
third by a vessel bound to Philadelphia. I have not yet learned by what
occasion the last went. In these several letters, I communicated to you
the occurrences of Europe, as far as they were then known.
Notwithstanding the advantage which the Emperor seemed to have gained
over his subjects of Brabant, by the military arrangements he had been
permitted to make under false pretexts, he has not obtained his ends.
He certainly wished to enforce his new regulations; but he wished more
to be cleared of all domestic difficulties, that he might be free to
act in the great scenes which are preparing for the theatre of Europe.
He seems, therefore to have instructed his Governor General of the
Netherlands to insist on compliance as far as could be insisted,
without producing resistance by arms; but, at the same time, to have
furnished him with a sufficiently complete recantation, to prevent the
effects of insurrection. The Governor pressed; the people were firm; a
small act of force was then attempted, which produced a decided
resistance, in which the people killed several of the military: the
last resource was then used, which was the act of recantation; this
produced immediate tranquillity, and everything there is now finally
settled, by the Emperor's relinquishment of his plans.

My letter of the evening of September the 22d, informed you that the
Prussian troops had entered Holland, and that of the 24th that England
had announced to this court that she was arming generally. These two
events being simultaneous, proved that the two sovereigns acted in
concert. Immediately after, the court of London announced to the other
courts of Europe, that if France entered Holland with armed force, she
would consider it as an act of hostility, and declare war against her;
sending Mr. Granville here at the same, to make what she called a
conciliatory proposition. This proposition was received as a new
insult, Mr. Granville very coolly treated, and he has now gone back. It
is said, he has carried the ultimatum of France. What it is,
particularly, has not transpired; it is only supposed, in general, to
be very firm. You will see in one of the Leyden gazettes, one of the
letters written by the ministers of England to the courts of their
respective residence, communicating the declaration before mentioned.
In the meantime, Holland has been sooner reduced by the Prussian troops
than could have been expected. The abandonment of Utrecht by the
Rhingrave of Salm, seems to have thrown the people under a general
panic, during which every place submitted, except Amsterdam. That had
opened conferences with the Duke of Brunswick; but as late as the
second instant, no capitulation was yet concluded. The King of Prussia,
on his first move, demanded categorically of the King of Poland, what
part he intended to act in the event of war. The latter answered, he
should act as events should dictate; and is, in consequence of this
species of menace from Prussia, arming himself. He can bring into the
field almost seventy thousand good cavalry. In the meantime, though
nothing transpires publicly of the confederation between France and the
two empires, mentioned in my letter of September the 19th, it is not
the less sure that it is on the carpet, and will take place. To the
circumstances before mentioned may be added, as further indications of
war, the naming as Generalissimo of their marine on the Atlantic,
Monsieur de Suffrein, on the Mediterranean, Monsieur Albert de Rioms,
the recalling Monsieur de St. Priest, their Ambassador, from Antwerp,
before he had reached the Hague, and the activity of their armies by
sea. On the other hand, the little movement by land would make one
suppose they expected to put the King of Prussia into other hands.
They, too, like the Emperor, are arranging matters at home. The
rigorous levy of the _deux vingtiËmes_ is enregistered, the stamp act
and impost territorial are revoked, the parliament recalled, the nation
soothed by these acts, and inspired by the insults of the British
court. The part of the Council still leaning towards peace, are become
unpopular, and perhaps may feel the effects of it. No change in the
administration has taken place since my last, unless we may consider as
such, Monsieur Cabarrus's refusal to stand in the lines. Thinking he
should be forced to follow, too seriously, plans formed by others, he
has declined serving.

Should this war take place, as is quite probable, and should it be as
general as it threatens to be, our neutrality must be attended with
great advantages. Whether of a nature to improve our morals or our
happiness, is another question. But is it sure, that Great Britain, by
her searches, her seizures, and other measures for harassing us, will
permit us to preserve our neutrality? I know it may be argued, that the
land war which she would superadd to her sea war, by provoking us to
join her enemies, should rationally hold her to her good behavior with
us. But since the accession of the present monarch, has it not been
passion, and not reason which, nine times out of ten, has dictated her
measures? Has there been a better rule of prognosticating what he would
do, than to examine what he ought not to do? When I review his
dispositions, and review his conduct, I have little hope of his
permitting our neutrality. He will find subjects of provocation in
various articles of our treaty with France, which will now come into
view, in all their consequences, and in consequences very advantageous
to the one, and injurious to the other country. I suggest these doubts,
on a supposition that our magazines are not prepared for war, and in
the opinion that provisions for that event should be thought of.

The enclosed letter from Mr. Dumas came to me open, though directed to
you. I immediately waited on the ambassadors, ordinary and
extraordinary, of Holland, and the envoy of Prussia, and prayed them to
interest themselves to have his person, his family and his goods
protected. They promised me readily to do it, and have written
accordingly; I trust it will be with effect. I could not avoid
enclosing you the letter from Monsieur BouebÈ, though I have satisfied
him he is to expect nothing from Congress for his inventions. These are
better certified than most of those things are; but if time stamps
their worth, time will give them to us. He expects no further answer.
The gazettes of Leyden and France to this date accompany this, which
will be delivered you by the Count de Moustier, Plenipotentiary from
this country.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem and
respect, Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO JAMES MADISON.

PARIS, October 8, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--The bearer hereof, the Count de Moustier, successor to
Monsieur de La Luzerne, would, from his office, need no letter of
introduction to you or to anybody. Yet I take the liberty of
recommending him to you, to shorten those formal approaches, which the
same office would otherwise expose him to, in making your acquaintance.
He is a great enemy to formality, etiquette, ostentation and luxury. He
goes with the best dispositions to cultivate society, without poisoning
it by ill example. He is sensible, disposed to view things favorably,
and being well acquainted with the constitution of England, her manners
and language, is the better prepared for his station with us. But I
should have performed only the lesser, and least pleasing half of my
task, were I not to add my recommendations of Madame de Brehan. She is
goodness itself. You must be well acquainted with her. You will find
her well disposed to meet your acquaintance, and well worthy of it. The
way to please her, is to receive her as an acquaintance of a thousand
years standing. She speaks little English. You must teach her more, and
learn French from her. She hopes, by accompanying Monsieur de Moustier,
to improve her health, which is very feeble, and still more, to improve
her son in his education, and to remove him to a distance from the
seductions of this country. You will wonder to be told, that there are
no schools in this country to be compared to ours, in the sciences. The
husband of Madame de Brehan is an officer, and obliged by the times to
remain with the army. Monsieur de Moustier brings your watch. I have
worn it two months, and really find it a most incomparable one. It will
not want the little redressing which new watches generally do, after
going about a year. It costs six hundred livres. To open it in all its
parts, press the little pin on the edge, with the point of your nail;
that opens the crystal; then open the dial-plate in the usual way; then
press the stem, at the end within the loop, and it opens the back for
winding up or regulating.

De Moustier is remarkably communicative. With adroitness he may be
pumped of anything. His openness is from character, not from
affectation. An intimacy with him may, on this account, be politically
valuable. I am, dear Sir, your affectionate friend and servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

(Private.) PARIS, October 8, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--The Count de Moustier, Minister Plenipotentiary from the
Court of Versailles to the United States, will have the honor of
delivering you this. The connection of your offices will necessarily
connect you in acquaintance; but I beg leave to present him to you, on
account of his personal as well as his public character. You will find
him open, communicative, candid, simple in his manners, and a declared
enemy to ostentation and luxury. He goes with a resolution to add no
aliment to it by his example, unless he finds that the dispositions of
our countrymen require it indispensably. Permit me, at the same time,
to solicit your friendly notice, and through you, that also of Mrs.
Jay, to Madame la Marquise de Brehan, sister-in-law to Monsieur de
Moustier. She accompanies him, in hopes that a change of climate may
assist her feeble health, and also, that she may procure a more
valuable education for her son, and safer from seduction, in America
than in France. I think it impossible to find a better woman, more
amiable, more modest, more simple in her manners, dress, and way of
thinking. She will deserve the friendship of Mrs. Jay, and the way to
obtain hers, is to receive her and treat her without the shadow of
etiquette.

The Count d'Aranda leaves us in a day or two. He desired me to recall
him to your recollection, and to assure you of his friendship. In a
letter which I mean as a private one, I may venture details too minute
for a public one, yet not unamusing, or unsatisfactory. I may venture
names, too, without the danger of their getting into a newspaper. There
has long been a division in the Council here, on the question of war
and peace. Monsieur de Montmorin and Monsieur de Breteuil have been
constantly for war. They are supported in this by the Queen. The King
goes for nothing. He hunts one half the day, is drunk the other, and
signs whatever he is bid. The Archbishop of Thoulouse desires peace.
Though brought in by the Queen, he is opposed to her in this capital
object, which would produce an alliance with her brother. Whether the
Archbishop will yield or not, I know not. But an intrigue is already
begun for ousting him from his place, and it is rather probable it will
succeed. He is a good and patriotic minister for peace, and very
capable in the department of finance. At least, he is so in theory. I
have heard his talents for execution censured. Can I be useful here to
Mrs. Jay or yourself, in executing any commissions, great or small? I
offer you my services with great cordiality. You know whether any of
the wines in this country may attract your wishes. In my tour, last
spring, I visited the best vineyards of Burgundy, Cote-rotie,
Hermitage, Lunelle, Frontignan, and white and red Bordeaux, got
acquainted with the proprietors, and can procure for you the best crops
from the vigneron himself. Mrs. Jay knows if there is anything else
here, in which I could be useful to her. Command me without ceremony,
as it will give me real pleasure to serve you, and be assured of the
sincere attachment and friendship, with which I am, dear Sir, your most
obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MONSIEUR LE COMTE DE MOUSTIER.

PARIS, October 9, 1787.


Mr. Jefferson has the honor of presenting his respects to Monsieur le
Comte de Moustier, and of taking leave of him by letter, which he is
prevented doing in person, by an unexpected visit to Versailles to-day.
He will hope to have the pleasure of sometimes hearing from him, and
will take the liberty occasionally, of troubling him with a letter. He
considers the Count de Moustier as forming, with himself, the two end
links of that chain which holds the two nations together, and is happy
to have observed in him dispositions to strengthen rather than to
weaken it. It is a station of importance, as on the cherishing good
dispositions and quieting bad ones, will depend, in some degree, the
happiness and prosperity of the two countries. The Count de Moustier
will find the affections of the Americans with France, but their habits
with England. Chained to that country by circumstances, embracing what
they loathe, they realize the fable of the living and the dead bound
together. Mr. Jefferson troubles the Count de Moustier with two
letters, to gentlemen whom he wishes to recommend to his particular
acquaintance, and to that of Madame de Brehan. He bids Monsieur de
Moustier a most friendly adieu, and wishes him everything which may
render agreeable his passage across the water, and his residence beyond
it.




TO MADAME DE BREHAN.

PARIS, October 9, 1787.


Persuaded, Madam, that visits at this moment must be troublesome, I beg
you to accept my adieus in this form. Be assured, that no one mingles
with them more regret at separating from you. I will ask your
permission to enquire of you by letter sometimes, how our country
agrees with your health and your expectations, and will hope to hear it
from yourself. The imitation of European manners, which you will find
in our towns, will, I fear, be little pleasing. I beseech you to
practice still your own, which will furnish them a model of what is
perfect. Should you be singular, it will be by excellence, and after
awhile you will see the effect of your example.

Heaven bless you, Madam, and guard you under all circumstances; give
you smooth waters, gentle breezes, and clear skies, hushing all its
elements into peace, and leading with its own hand the favored bark,
till it shall have safely landed its precious charge on the shores of
our new world.




TO MONSIEUR LIMOZIN.

PARIS, October 9, 1787.


SIR,--I have duly received your favor with my account balance 160_l._
7_s._, which shall be paid to your order. I observe it is supposed with
you that the differences between the courts of London and St. Cloud are
nearly settled. But be assured on the contrary, that no accommodation
is expected, and that war is as certain as it can be, without being
actually commenced or declared. There remains, indeed, a possibility of
preventing it, but it is very feeble. This court would be disposed to
do it, but they believe that of London decided on war. We cannot
foresee the moment it will commence, but it is not distant, according
to present appearances. M. de Suffrein is appointed to command on the
Ocean, and M. Albert de Rion on the Mediterranean.

I have the honor to be, with much respect, Sir, your most obedient
humble servant.




TO MR. C. W. F. DUMAS.

PARIS, October 14, 1787.


SIR,--I have duly received your favors of October the 23d and 26th.
With respect to the mission you suggest in the former, no powers are
lodged in the hands of Mr. Adams and myself. Congress commissioned Mr.
Adams, Dr. Franklin and myself, to treat with the Emperor on the
subject of amity and commerce; at the same time, they gave us the
commission to Prussia, with which you are acquainted. We proposed
treating through the Imperial Ambassador here. It was declined on their
part, and our powers expired, having been given but for two years.
Afterwards, the same Ambassador here was instructed to offer to treat
with us. I informed him our powers were expired, but that I would write
to Congress on the subject. I did so, but have never yet received an
answer. Whether this proceeds from a change of opinion in them, or from
the multiplicity of their occupations, I am unable to say; but this
state of facts will enable you to see that we have no powers in this
instance, to take the measures you had thought of. I sincerely
sympathise with you in your sufferings. Though forbidden by my
character, to meddle in the internal affairs of an allied State, it is
the wish of my heart that their troubles may have such an issue, as
will secure the greatest degree of happiness to the body of the people;
for it is with the mass of the nation we are allied, and not merely
with their governors. To inform the minds of the people, and to follow
their will, is the chief duty of those placed at their head. What party
in your late struggles was most likely to do this, you are more
competent to judge than I am. Under every event, that you may be safe
and happy, is the sincere wish of him, who has the honor to be, with
sentiments of great esteem, Sir, your most obedient, and most humble
servant.




TO MADAME DE CORNY.

PARIS, October 18, 1787.


I now have the honor, Madam, to send you the Memoire of M. de Calonnes.
Do not injure yourself by hurrying its perusal. Only, when you shall
have read it at your ease, be so good as to send it back, that it may
be returned to the Duke of Dorset. You will read it with pleasure. It
has carried comfort to my heart, because it must do the same to the
King and the nation. Though it does not prove M. de Calonnes to be more
innocent than his predecessors, it shows him not to have been that
exaggerated scoundrel, which the calculations and the clamors of the
public have supposed. It shows that the public treasures have not been
so inconceivably squandered, as the parliaments of Grenoble, Thoulouse,
etc., had affirmed. In fine, it shows him less wicked, and France less
badly governed, than I had feared. In examining my little collection of
books, to see what it could furnish you on the subject of Poland; I
find a small piece which may serve as a supplement to the history I had
sent you. It contains a mixture of history and politics, which I think
you will like.

How do you do this morning? I have feared you exerted and exposed
yourself too much yesterday. I ask you the question, though I shall not
await its answer. The sky is clearing, and I shall away to my
hermitage. God bless you, my dear Madam, now and always. Adieu.




TO THE COUNT DE MONTMORIN.

PARIS, October 23, 1787.


SIR,--I take the liberty of troubling your Excellency on the subject of
the _Arret_ which has lately appeared, for prohibiting the importation
of whale oils and spermaceti, the produce of foreign fisheries. This
prohibition being expressed in general terms, seems to exclude the
whale oils of the United States of America, as well as of the nations
of Europe. The uniform disposition, however, which his Majesty and his
ministers have shown to promote the commerce between France and the
United States, by encouraging our productions to come hither, and
particularly those of our fisheries, induces me to hope, that these
were not within their view, at the passing of this _Arret_. I am led
the more into this opinion, when I recollect the assiduity exercised
for several months, in the year 1785, by the committee appointed by
government to investigate the objects of commerce of the two countries,
and to report the encouragements of which it was susceptible; the
result of that investigation, which his Majesty's Comptroller General
did me the honor to communicate, in a letter of the 22d of October,
1786, stating therein the principles which should be established for
the future regulations of that commerce, and particularly
distinguishing the articles of whale oils by an abatement of the duties
of them for the present, and a promise of further abatement after the
year 1790; the thorough re-investigation with which Monsieur de Lambert
honored this subject, when the letter of 1786 was to be put into the
form of an _Arret_; that _Arret_ itself, bearing date the 29th of
December last, which ultimately confirmed the abatements of duty
present and future, and declared that his Majesty reserved to himself
to grant other favors to that production, if on further information, he
should find it for the interest of the two nations; and finally, the
letter in which Monsieur de Lambert did me the honor to enclose the
_Arret_, and to assure me, that the duties which had been levied on our
whale oils, contrary to the intention of the letter of 1786, should be
restored. On a review, then, of all these circumstances, I cannot but
presume, that it has not been intended to reverse, in a moment, views
so maturely digested, and uniformly pursued; and that the general
expressions of the _Arret_ of September the 28th had within their
contemplation the nations of Europe only. This presumption is further
strengthened by having observed, that in the treaties of commerce, made
since the epoch of our independence, the _jura gentis amicissimÊ_
conceded to other nations, are expressly restrained to those of the
"most favored _European_ nation;" his Majesty wisely foreseeing, that
it would be expedient to regulate the commerce of a nation, which
brings nothing but raw materials to employ the industry of his
subjects, very differently from that of the European nations, who bring
mostly what has already passed through all the stages of manufacture.

On these circumstances, I take the liberty of asking information from
your Excellency, as to the extent of the late _Arret_; and if I have
not been mistaken in supposing it did not mean to abridge that of
December the 29th, I would solicit an explanatory _Arret_, to prevent
the misconstructions of it, which will otherwise take place. It is much
to be desired, too, that this explanation could be given as soon as
possible, in order that it may be handed out with the _Arret_ of
September the 28th. Great alarm may otherwise spread among the
merchants and adventurers in the fisheries, who, confiding in the
stability of regulations, which his Majesty's wisdom had so long and
well matured, have embarked their fortunes in speculations in this
branch of business.

The importance of the subject to one of the principal members of our
Union induces me to attend with great anxiety, the re-assurance from
your Excellency, that no change has taken place in his Majesty's views
on this subject; and that his dispositions to multiply, rather than
diminish the combinations of interest between the two people, continue
unaltered.

Commerce is slow in changing its channel. That between this country and
the United States, is as yet but beginning; and this beginning has
received some checks. The _Arret_ in question would be a considerable
one, without the explanation I have the honor to ask. I am persuaded,
that a continuation of the dispositions which have been hitherto
manifested towards us, will insure effects, political and commercial,
of value to both nations.

I have had too many proofs of the friendly interest your Excellency is
pleased to take, in whatever may strengthen the bands and connect the
views of the two countries, to doubt your patronage of the present
application; or to pretermit any occasion of repeating assurances of
those sentiments of high respect and esteem with which I have the honor
to be, your Excellency's most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MONSIEUR L'ABB… DE MORELLET.

PARIS, Oct. 24, 1787


SIR,--I wish it were in my power to announce to the Count de Cambrai
that the Treasury Board of the United States had enabled their banker
here to answer the demands of the foreign officers. But it is not. As
soon as I knew that there was a deficiency of money to pay the interest
of this demand I informed the Treasury Board of it. They answered me
they would supply the necessary fund as soon as it should be in their
power; and I am persuaded they have not failed in inclination to do it.
Of this I had the honor to notify the Count de Cambrai the last year.
It is not unknown to you that the pursuit of our new machine of
government which works the worst, is that which respects the raising
money; and it is that which has occasioned the late attempts to amend
our confederation. Foreseeing that our Treasury Board might not be able
to remit money from America, I suggested to Congress the expediency of
borrowing money in Holland to pay off the foreign officers. And in the
month of July last, being assured they could command the money in
Holland, I pressed a more particular proposition to this purpose. As I
do not foresee any possible objection to the proposition I made them, I
think myself sure of their acceding to it, and that I may receive news
of it in the month of December. I may be disappointed as to the time of
receiving their answer, because the course of their business is slow;
but I do not apprehend it will be much retarded, and still less that
they will refuse it altogether. The moment I receive an answer, the
Count de Cambrai may be assured it shall be communicated to him. In
doing this I shall gratify not only my personal friendship for him, but
also those sentiments of particular esteem and attachment with which I
have the honor to be, dear Sir, your most obedient, and most humble
servant.




TO THE HONORABLE JOHN JAY.

PARIS, Oct. 27, 1787.


SIR,--When I had the honor of addressing you on the 8th instant, the
appearances of war were such, that no one would have been surprised to
hear that hostilities were actually commenced at sea. The preparations
were pushed with such vivacity on the part of England, that it was
believed she had other objects in view than those she spoke out.
However, having protected by her countenance the establishment of the
Stadtholder by the Prussian troops, and completely detached the Court
of Berlin from that of Versailles, she made a proposition to the latter
to disarm, which was agreed to. Mutual declarations for this purpose
were signed last night at Versailles, of which I have now the honor to
enclose you copies.

Commissaries are to be appointed on each side to see that the disarming
takes place. The Count de Moustier having been detained at Brest a
fortnight by contrary wind, and this continuing obstinately in the same
point, admits a possibility that this letter may yet reach Brest before
his departure. It passes through the post office and will be opened and
read of course. I shall have the honor of addressing you more fully a
week hence by a private hand. I have now that of assuring you of the
sincerity of that esteem and respect with which I have the honor to be,
Sir, your most obedient and most humble servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

PARIS, November 3, 1787.


SIR,--My last letters to you were of the 8th and 27th of October. In
the former, I mentioned to you the declaration of this country, that
they would interpose with force, if the Prussian troops entered
Holland; the entry of those troops into Holland; the declaration of
England, that if France did oppose force, they would consider it as an
act of war; the naval armaments on both sides; the nomination of the
Bailli de Suffrein as Generalissimo on the ocean; and the cold
reception of Mr. Granville here, with his conciliatory propositions, as
so many symptoms which seemed to indicate a certain and immediate
rupture. It was indeed universally and hourly expected. But the King of
Prussia, a little before these last events, got wind of the alliance on
the carpet between France and the two empires; he awaked to the
situation in which that would place him; he made some applications to
the court of St. Petersburg, to divert the Empress from the proposed
alliance, and supplicated the court of London not to abandon him. That
court had also received a hint of the same project; both seemed to
suspect, for the first time, that it would be possible for France to
abandon the Turks, and that they were likely to get more than they had
played for at Constantinople, for they had meant nothing more there,
than to divert the Empress and Emperor from the affairs of the west, by
employing them in the east, and at the same time, to embroil them with
France as the patroness of the Turks. The court of London engaged not
to abandon Prussia: but both of them relaxed a little the tone of their
proceedings. The King of Prussia sent a Mr. Alvensleben here expressly
to explain and soothe: the King of England, notwithstanding the cold
reception of his propositions by Granville, renewed conferences here
through Eden and the Duke of Dorset. The Minister, in the affection of
his heart for peace, readily joined in conference, and a declaration
and counter-declaration were cooked up at Versailles, and sent to
London for approbation. They were approved, arrived here at one o'clock
the 27th, were signed that night at Versailles, and on the next day, I
had the honor of enclosing them to you, under cover to the Count de
Moustier, whom I supposed still at Brest, dating my letter as of the
27th, by mistake for the 28th. Lest, however, these papers should not
have got to Brest before the departure of the Count de Moustier, I now
enclose you other copies. The English declaration states a notification
of this court, in September, by Barthelemy, their Minister at London,
"that they would send succours into Holland," as the first cause of
England's arming; desires an explanation of the intentions of this
court, as to the affairs of Holland, and proposes to disarm; on
condition, however, that the King of France shall not retain any
hostile views in any quarter, for what has been done in Holland. This
last phrase was to secure Prussia, according to promise. The King of
France acknowledges the notification by his Minister at London,
promises he will do nothing in consequence of it, declares he has no
intention to intermeddle with force in the affairs of Holland, and that
he will entertain hostile views in no quarter, for what has been done
there. He disavows having ever had any intention to interpose with
force in the affairs of that republic. This disavowal begins the
sentence, which acknowledges he had notified the contrary to the court
of London, and it includes no apology to soothe the feelings which may
be excited in the breasts of the Patriots of Holland, at hearing the
King declare he never did intend to aid them with force, when promises
to do this were the basis of those very attempts to better their
constitution, which have ended in its ruin, as well as their own.

I have analyzed these declarations, because, being somewhat wrapped up
in their expressions, their full import might escape, on a transient
reading; and it is necessary it should not escape. It conveys to us the
important lesson, that no circumstances of morality, honor, interest,
or engagement, are sufficient to authorize a secure reliance on any
nation, at all times, and in all positions. A moment of difficulty, or
a moment of error, may render forever useless the most friendly
dispositions in the King, in the major part of his ministers, and the
whole of his nation. The present pacification is considered by most as
only a short truce. They calculate on the spirit of the nation, and not
on the agued hand which guides its movements. It is certain, that from
this moment the whole system of Europe changes. Instead of counting
together England, Austria, and Russia, as heretofore, against France,
Spain, Holland, Prussia, and Turkey, the division will probably be,
England, Holland, and Prussia, against France, Austria, Russia, and
perhaps Spain. This last power is not sure, because the dispositions of
its heir apparent are not sure. But whether the present be truce or
peace, it will allow time to mature the conditions of the alliance
between France and the two empires, always supposed to be on the
carpet. It is thought to be obstructed by the avidity of the Emperor,
who would swallow a good part of Turkey, Silesia, Bavaria, and the
rights of the Germanic body. To the two or three first articles, France
might consent, receiving in gratification a well-rounded portion of the
Austrian Netherlands, with the islands of Candia, Cyprus, Rhodes, and
perhaps lower Egypt. But all this is in embryo, uncertainty known, and
counterworked by the machinations of the courts of London and Berlin.

The following solution of the British armaments is supposed in a letter
of the 25th ultimo, from Colonel Blachden of Connecticut, now at
Dunkirk, to the Marquis de La Fayette. I will cite it in his own
words:--"A gentleman who left London two days ago, and came to this
place to-day, informs me that it is now generally supposed that Mr.
Pitt's great secret, which has puzzled the whole nation so long, and to
accomplish which design the whole force of the nation is armed, is to
make a vigorous effort for the recovery of America. When I recollect
the delay they have made in delivering the forts in America, and that
little more than a year ago, one of the British ministry wrote to the
King a letter, in which were these remarkable words, 'if your Majesty
pleases, America may yet be yours;' add to this, if it were possible
for the present ministry in England to effect such a matter, they would
secure their places and their power for a long time, and should they
fail in the end, they would be certain of holding them during the
attempt, which it is in their power to prolong as much as they please,
and, at all events, they would boast of having endeavored the recovery
of what a former ministry had abandoned--it is possible." A similar
surmise has come in a letter from a person in Rotterdam to one at this
place. I am satisfied that the King of England believes the mass of our
people to be tired of their independence, and desirous of returning
under his government; and that the same opinion prevails in the
ministry and nation. They have hired their news writers to repeat this
lie in their gazettes so long, that they have become the dupes of it
themselves. But there is no occasion to recur to this, in order to
account for their arming. A more rational purpose avowed, that purpose
executed, and when executed, a solemn agreement to disarm, seem to
leave no doubt that the re-establishment of the Stadtholder was their
object. Yet it is possible, that having found that this court will not
make war in this moment for any ally, new views may arise, and they may
think the moment favorable for executing any purposes they may have, in
our quarter. Add to this, that reason is of no aid in calculating their
movements. We are, therefore, never safe till our magazines are filled
with arms. The present season of truce or peace, should, in my opinion,
be improved without a moment's respite, to effect this essential
object, and no means be omitted, by which money may be obtained for the
purpose. I say this, however, with due deference to the opinion of
Congress, who are better judges of the necessity and practicability of
the measure.

I mentioned to you, in a former letter, the application I had made to
the Dutch ambassadors and Prussian envoy, for the protection of Mr.
Dumas. The latter soon after received an assurance, that he was put
under the protection of the States of Holland; and the Dutch Ambassador
called on me a few days ago, to inform me, by instruction from his
constituents, "that the States General had received a written
application from Mr. Adams, praying their protection of Dumas; that
they had instructed their _greffier_, Fagel, to assure Mr. Adams, by
letter, that he was under the protection of the States of Holland; but
to inform him, at the same time, that Mr. Dumas' conduct, out of the
line of his office, had been so extraordinary, that they would expect
_de l'honnÍtetÈ_ de Mr. Adams, that he would charge some other person
with the affairs of the United States, during his absence."

Your letter of September the 8th, has been duly received. I shall pay
due attention to the instructions relative to the medals, and give any
aid I can in the case of Boss' vessel. As yet, however, my endeavors to
find Monsieur Pauly, _avocat au conseil d'Ètat, rue Coquilliere_, have
been ineffectual. There is no such person living in that street. I
found a Monsieur Pauly, _avocat au parlement_, in another part of the
town; he opened the letter, but said it could not mean him. I shall
advertise in the public papers. If that fails, there will be no other
chance of finding him. Mr. Warnum will do well, therefore, to send some
other description by which the person may be found. Indeed, some friend
of the party interested should be engaged to follow up this business,
as it will require constant attention, and probably a much larger sum
of money than that named in the bill enclosed in Mr. Warnum's letter.

I have the honor to enclose you a letter from O'Bryan to me, containing
information from Algiers, and one from Mr. Montgomery, at Alicant. The
purpose of sending you this last, is to show you how much the
difficulties of ransom are increased since the Spanish negotiations.
The Russian captives have cost about eight thousand livres apiece, on
an average. I certainly have no idea that we should give any such sum;
and, therefore, if it should be the sense of Congress to give such a
price, I would be glad to know it by instruction. My idea is, that we
should not ransom, but on the footing of the nation which pays least,
that it may be as little worth their while to go in pursuit of us, as
any nation. This is cruelty to the individuals now in captivity, but
kindness to the hundreds that would soon be so, were we to make it
worth the while of those pirates to go cut of the Straits in quest of
us. As soon as money is provided, I shall put this business into train.
I have taken measures to damp at Algiers all expectations of our
proposing to ransom, at any price. I feel the distress which this must
occasion to our countrymen there, and their connections; but the object
of it is their ultimate good, by bringing down their holders to such a
price as we ought to pay, instead of letting them remain in such
expectations as cannot be gratified. The gazettes of France and Leyden
accompany this.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem and
respect, Sir, your most obedient humble servant.

[_The annexed are translations of the declaration and
counter-declaration, referred to in the preceding letter._]

DECLARATION.

The events which have taken place in the republic of the United
provinces, appearing no longer to leave any subject of discussion, and
still less of dispute, between the two courts, the undersigned are
authorized to ask, if it be the intention of his most Christian Majesty
to act in pursuance of the notification given, on the 16th of last
month, by the Minister Plenipotentiary of his most Christian Majesty,
which announcing his purpose of aiding Holland, has occasioned maritime
armaments on the part of his Majesty, which armaments have become
reciprocal.

If the court of Versailles is disposed to explain itself on this
subject, and on the conduct adopted towards the republic, in a manner
conformably to the desire evinced by each party, to preserve a good
understanding between the two courts, it being also understood, at the
same time, that no hostile view is entertained in any quarter, in
consequence of the past; his Majesty, always eager to manifest his
concurrence in the friendly sentiments of his most Christian Majesty,
agrees forthwith that the armaments, and, in general, all preparations
for war, shall be mutually discontinued, and that the marines of the
two nations shall be placed on the footing of a peace establishment,
such as existed on the first of January of the present year.

Signed. { DORSET.
        { WM. EDEN.

At Versailles, the 27th of October, 1787.


COUNTER-DECLARATION.

It neither being, nor ever having been, the intention of his Majesty to
interpose by force in the affairs of the republic of the United
provinces, the communication made to the court of London by M.
Barthelemy, having had no other object than to announce to that court
an intention, the motives of which no longer exist, _especially since
the King of Prussia has made known his resolution_, his Majesty makes
no difficulty in declaring, that he has no wish to act in pursuance of
the communication aforesaid, and that he entertains no hostile view in
any quarter, relative to what has passed in Holland.

Consequently, his Majesty, desiring to concur in the sentiments of his
Britannic Majesty, for the preservation of a good understanding between
the two courts, consents with pleasure to the proposition of his
Britannic Majesty, that the armaments, and, in general, all
preparations for war, shall be mutually discontinued, and that the
marines of the two nations shall be replaced upon the footing of the
peace establishment, as it existed on the first day of January of the
present year.

Signed. MONTMORIN.

At Versailles, the 27th of October, 1787.




TO JOHN JAY.

(Private.) PARIS, November 3, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I shall take the liberty of confiding sometimes to a private
letter such details of the small history of the court or cabinet, as
may be worthy of being known, and yet not proper to be publicly
communicated. I doubt whether the administration is yet in a permanent
form. The Count de Montmorin and Baron de Breteuil are, I believe, firm
enough in their places. It was doubted whether they would wait for the
Count de La Luzerne, if the war had taken place; but at present, I
suppose they will. I wish it also, because M. de Hector, his only
competitor, has on some occasions shown little value for the connection
with us. Lambert, the Comptroller General, is thought to be very
insecure. I should be sorry also to lose him. I have worked several
days with him, the Marquis de La Fayette, and Monsieur du Pont, (father
of the young gentleman gone to America with the Count de Moustier) to
reduce into one _Arret_, whatever concerned our commerce. I have found
him a man of great judgment and application, possessing good general
principles on subjects of commerce, and friendly dispositions towards
us. He passed the _Arret_ in a very favorable form, but it has been
opposed in the Council, and will, I fear, suffer some alteration in the
article of whale oil. That of tobacco, which was put into a separate
instrument, experiences difficulties also, which do not come from him.
M. du Pont has rendered us essential service on these occasions. I wish
his son could be so well noticed, as to make a favorable report to his
father; he would, I think, be gratified by it, and his good
dispositions be strengthened, and rendered further useful to us.
Whether I shall be able to send you these regulations by the present
packet, will depend on their getting through the Council in time. The
Archbishop continues well with his patroness. Her object is, a close
connection with her brother. I suppose he convinces her, that peace
will furnish the best occasion of cementing that connection.

It may not be uninstructive, to give you the origin and nature of his
influence with the Queen. When the Duke de Choiseul proposed the
marriage of the Dauphin with this lady, he thought it proper to send a
person to Vienna, to perfect her in the language. He asked his friend,
the Archbishop of Thoulouse, to recommend to him a proper person. He
recommended a certain AbbÈ. The AbbÈ, from his first arrival at Vienna,
either tutored by his patron, or prompted by gratitude, impressed on
the Queen's mind, the exalted talents and merit of the Archbishop, and
continually represented him as the only man fit to be placed at the
helm of affairs. On his return to Paris, being retained near the person
of the Queen, he kept him constantly in her view. The Archbishop was
named of the Assembly des Notables, had occasion enough there to prove
his talents, and Count de Vergennes, his great enemy, dying
opportunely, the Queen got him into place. He uses the AbbÈ even yet,
for instilling all his notions into her mind. That he has imposing
talents and patriotic dispositions, I think is certain. Good judges
think him a theorist only, little acquainted with the details of
business, and spoiling all his plans by a bungled execution. He may
perhaps undergo a severe trial. His best actions are exciting against
him a host of enemies, particularly the reduction of the pensions, and
reforms in other branches of economy. Some think the other ministers
are willing he should stay in, till he has effected this odious, yet
necessary work, and that they will then make him the scape-goat of the
transaction. The declarations too, which I send you in my public
letter, if they should become public, will probably raise an universal
cry. It will all fall on him, because Montmorin and Breteuil say,
without reserve, that the sacrifice of the Dutch has been against their
advice. He will, perhaps, not permit these declarations to appear in
this country. They are absolutely unknown; they were communicated to me
by the Duke of Dorset, and I believe no other copy has been given here.
They Till be published doubtless in England, as a proof of their
triumph, and may thence make their way into this country. If the
Premier can stem a few months, he may remain long in office, and will
never make war if he can help it. If he should be removed, the peace
will probably be short. He is solely chargeable with the loss of
Holland. True, they could not have raised money by taxes, to supply the
necessities of war; but could they do it were their finances ever so
well arranged? No nation makes war now-a-days, but by the aid of loans;
and it is probable, that in a war for the liberties of Holland, all the
treasures of that country would have been at their service. They have
now lost the cow which furnishes the milk of war. She will be on the
side of their enemies, whenever a rupture shall take place; and no
arrangement of their finances can countervail this circumstance.

I have no doubt, you permit access to the letters of your foreign
ministers, by persons only of the most perfect trust. It is in the
European system, to bribe the clerks high, in order to obtain copies of
interesting papers. I am sure you are equally attentive to the
conveyance of your letters to us, as you know that all are opened that
pass through any post-office of Europe. Your letters which come by the
packet, if put into the mail at New York, or into the post-office at
Havre, wear proofs that they have been opened. The passenger to whom
they are confided, should be cautioned always to keep them in his own
hands, till he can deliver them personally in Paris.

I have the honor to be, with very sincere esteem and respect, dear Sir,
your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO THE COUNT DE MONTMORIN.

PARIS, November 6, 1787.


SIR,--I take the liberty of asking your Excellency's perusal of the
enclosed case of an American hostage, confined in the prisons of
Dunkirk. His continuance seems to be useless, and yet endless. Not
knowing how far the government can interfere for his relief, as it is a
case wherein private property is concerned, I do not presume to ask his
liberation absolutely; but I will solicit from your Excellency such
measures in his behalf, as the laws and usages of the country may
permit.

The Comptroller General having been so good as to explain to me in a
conversation that he wished to know what duties were levied in England
on American whale oil, I have had the honor of informing him by letter,
that the ancient duties on that article are seventeen pounds, six
shillings and six pence sterling, the ton, and that some late
additional duties make them amount to about eighteen pounds sterling.
That the common whale oil sells there but for about twenty pounds
sterling, the ton, and of course the duty amounts to a prohibition.
This duty was originally laid on all foreign fish oil, with a view to
favor the British and American fisheries. When we became independent,
and, of course, foreign to great Britain, we became subject to the
foreign duty. No duty, therefore, which France may think proper to lay
on this article, can drive it to the English market. It could only
oblige the inhabitants of Nantucket to abandon their fishery. But the
poverty of their soil offering them no other resource, they must quit
their country, and either establish themselves in Nova Scotia, where,
as British fishermen, they may participate of the British premium, in
addition to the ordinary price of their whale oil, or they must accept
the conditions which this government offers, for the establishment they
have proposed at Dunkirk. Your Excellency will judge, what conditions
may counterbalance, in their minds, the circumstances of the vicinity
of Nova Scotia, sameness of language, laws, religion, customs and
kindred. Remaining in their native country, to which they are most
singularly attached, excluded from commerce with England, taught to
look to France as the only country from which they can derive
sustenance, they will, in case of war, become useful rovers against its
enemies. Their position, their poverty, their courage, their address
and their hatred, will render them formidable scourges on the British
commerce. It is to be considered then, on the one hand, that the duty
which M. de Calonnes had proposed to retain on their oil, may endanger
the shifting this useful body of seamen out of our joint scale into
that of the British; and also may suppress a considerable subject of
exchange for the productions of France: on the other hand, that it may
produce an addition to his Majesty's revenue. What I have thus far
said, is on the supposition, that the duty may operate a diminution of
the price received by the fishermen. If it act in the contrary
direction, and produce an augmentation of price to the consumer, it
immediately brings into competition a variety of other oils, vegetable
and animal, a good part of which France receives from abroad, and the
fisherman thus losing his market, is compelled equally to change either
his calling or country. When M. de Calonnes first agreed to reduce the
duties to what he has declared, I had great hopes the commodity could
bear them, and that it would become a medium of commerce between France
and the United States. I must confess, however, that my expectations
have not been fulfilled, and that but little has come here as yet. This
induces me to fear, that it is so poor an article, that any duty
whatever will suppress it. Should this take place, and the spirit of
emigration once seize those people, perhaps an abolition of all duty
might then come too late to stop, what it would now easily prevent. I
fear there is danger in the experiment; and it remains for the wisdom
of his Majesty and his ministers to decide, whether the prospect of
gain to the revenue, or establishing a national fishery, may compensate
this danger. If the Government should decide to retain the duty, I
shall acquiesce in it cheerfully, and do everything in my power to
encourage my countrymen still to continue their occupation.

The actual session of our several legislatures would render it
interesting to forward immediately the regulations proposed on our
commerce; and the expiration of the order of Bernis, at the close of
this month, endangers a suspension and derangement in the commerce of
tobacco, very embarrassing to the merchants of the two countries.
Pardon me, therefore, Sir, if I appear solicitous to obtain the
ultimate decision of his Majesty's Council on these subjects and to ask
as early a communication of that decision, as shall be convenient.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most profound esteem and
respect, your Excellency's most obedient, and most humble servant.


[Illustration: John Jay
 Photogravure from the Original Painting by Stuart and Trumbull]




TO THE HON. JOHN JAY.

PARIS, November 7, 1787.


SIR,--By a letter of the 2d instant, from the Count de Moustier, I
perceive he is still at Brest. The wind has been now near a month in
the south-western quarter, and if it remains there a few days longer,
my despatches by the packet may reach you as soon as those by Monsieur
de Moustier. This being the last post which can reach the packet,
should she sail on the 10th, I avail myself of it to inform you of the
only circumstance, since the date of my letters delivered to Mr.
Stuart, worth your knowledge; that is the appointment of the Chevalier
de La Luzerne, Ambassador to the Court of London. This fortunate issue
of those expectations which made him unwilling to return to America,
together with the character of his successor, will, I hope, render it
pleasing to Congress that his return was not too much pressed. He would
have gone back with dispositions toward us very different from those he
will carry for us to the Court of London. He has been constantly
sensible that we wished his return, and that we could have procured it,
but that we did not wish to stand in the way of his promotion. He will
view this as in some measure the effect of our indulgence, and I think
we may count on his patronage and assistance wherever they may be
useful to us. I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most
perfect esteem and respect, Sir, your most obedient, and most humble
servant.




TO JOHN ADAMS.

PARIS, November 13, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--This will be delivered you by young Mr. Rutledge. Your
knowledge of his father will introduce him to your notice. He merits it
moreover, on his own account.

I am now to acknowledge your favors of Oct. the 8th and 26th. That of
Aug. 25th was duly received, nor can I recollect by what accident I was
prevented from acknowledging it in mine of Sept. the 28th. It has been
the source of my subsistence hitherto, and must continue to be so, till
I receive letters on the affairs of money from America. Van Staphorsts
and Willinks have answered my drafts. Your books for the Marquis de La
Fayette are received here. I will notify it to him, who is at present
with his Provincial Assembly in Auvergne.

Little is said lately of the progress of the negotiations between the
courts of Petersburg, Vienna and Versailles. The distance of the
former, and the cautious, unassuming character of its minister here, is
one cause of delays: a greater one is, the greediness and unstable
character of the Emperor. Nor do I think that the Principal here will
be easily induced to lend himself to any connection, which shall
threaten a war within a considerable number of years. His own reign
will be that of peace only, in all probability; and were any accident
to tumble him down, this country would immediately gird on its sword
and buckler, and trust to occurrences for supplies of money. The wound
their honor has sustained festers in their hearts; and it may be said
with truth, that the Archbishop, and a few priests determined to
support his measures, because, proud to see their order come again into
power, are the only advocates for the line of conduct which has been
pursued. It is said and believed through Paris literally, that the
Count de Montmorin, "_pleuroit comme un enfant_," when obliged to sign
the counter-declaration. Considering the phrase as figurative, I
believe it expresses the distress of his heart. Indeed, he has made no
secret of his individual opinion. In the meantime, the Principal goes
on with a firm and patriotic spirit, in reforming the cruel abuses of
the government, and preparing a new constitution, which will give to
this people as much liberty as they are capable of managing. This, I
think, will be the glory of his administration, because, though a good
theorist in finance, he is thought to execute badly. They are about to
open a loan of one hundred millions, to supply present wants, and it is
said, the preface of the _Arret_ will contain a promise of the
convocation of the States General, during the ensuing year. Twelve or
fifteen Provincial Assemblies are already in action, and are going on
well; and I think, that though the nation suffers in reputation, it
will gain infinitely in happiness, under the present administration. I
enclose to Mr. Jay, a pamphlet which I will beg of you to forward. I
leave it open for your perusal. When you shall have read it, be so good
as to stick a wafer in it. It is not yet published, nor will be for
some days. This copy has been ceded to me as a favor.

How do you like our new constitution? I confess there are things in it
which stagger all my dispositions to subscribe to what such an Assembly
has proposed. The house of federal representatives will not be adequate
to the management of affairs, either foreign or federal. Their
President seems a bad edition of a Polish King. He may be elected from
four years to four years, for life. Reason and experience prove to us,
that a chief magistrate, so continuable, is an office for life. When
one or two generations shall have proved that this is an office for
life, it becomes, on every occasion, worthy of intrigue, of bribery, of
force, and even of foreign interference. It will be of great
consequence to France and England, to have America governed by a
Galloman or Angloman. Once in office, and possessing the military force
of the Union, without the aid or check of a council, he would not be
easily dethroned, even if the people could be induced to withdraw their
votes from him. I wish that at the end of the four years, they had made
him forever ineligible a second time. Indeed, I think all the good of
this new constitution might have been couched in three or four new
articles, to be added to the good, old and venerable fabric, which
should have been preserved even as a religious relique. Present me and
my daughters affectionately to Mrs. Adams. The younger one continues to
speak of her warmly. Accept yourself, assurances of the sincere esteem
and respect with which I have the honor to be, dear Sir, your friend
and servant.

P. S. I am in negotiation with de La Blancharie. You shall hear from me
when arranged.




TO COLONEL SMITH.

PARIS, November 13, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I am now to acknowledge the receipt of your favors of
October the 4th, 8th, and 26th. In the last, you apologize for your
letters of introduction to Americans coming here. It is so far from
needing apology on your part, that it calls for thanks on mine. I
endeavor to show civilities to all the Americans who come here, and who
will give me opportunities of doing it; and it is a matter of comfort
to know, from a good quarter, what they are, and how far I may go in my
attentions to them.

Can you send me Woodmason's bills for the two copying presses for the
Marquis de La Fayette and the Marquis de Chastellux? The latter makes
one article in a considerable account, of old standing, and which I
cannot present for want of this article. I do not know whether it is to
yourself or Mr. Adams, I am to give my thanks for the copy of the new
constitution. I beg leave through you to place them where due. It will
yet be three weeks before I shall receive them from America. There are
very good articles in it, and very bad. I do not know which
preponderate. What we have lately read, in the history of Holland, in
the chapter on the Stadtholder, would have sufficed to set me against a
chief magistrate, eligible for a long duration, if I had ever been
disposed towards one; and what we have always read of the elections of
Polish Kings should have forever excluded the idea of one continuable
for life. Wonderful is the effect of impudent and persevering lying.
The British ministry have so long hired their gazetteers to repeat, and
model into every form, lies about our being in anarchy, that the world
has at length believed them, the English nation has believed them, the
ministers themselves have come to believe them, and what is more
wonderful, we have believed them ourselves. Yet where does this anarchy
exist? Where did it ever exist, except in the single instance of
Massachusetts? And can history produce an instance of rebellion so
honorably conducted? I say nothing of its motives. They were founded in
ignorance, not wickedness. God forbid we should ever be twenty years
without such a rebellion. The people cannot be all, and always, well
informed. The part which is wrong will be discontented, in proportion
to the importance of the facts they misconceive. If they remain quiet
under such misconceptions, it is a lethargy, the forerunner of death to
the public liberty. We have had thirteen States independent for eleven
years. There has been one rebellion. That comes to one rebellion in a
century and a half, for each State. What country before, ever existed a
century and a half without a rebellion? And what country can preserve
its liberties, if its rulers are not warned from time to time, that
this people preserve the spirit of resistance? Let them take arms. The
remedy is to set them right as to facts, pardon and pacify them. What
signify a few lives lost in a century or two? The tree of liberty must
be refreshed from time to time, with the blood of patriots and tyrants.
It is its natural manure. Our convention has been too much impressed by
the insurrection of Massachusetts; and on the spur of the moment, they
are setting up a kite to keep the hen yard in order. I hope in God,
this article will be rectified before the new constitution is accepted.
You ask me if anything transpires here on the subject of South America?
Not a word. I know that there are combustible materials there, and that
they wait the torch only. But this country probably will join the
extinguishers. The want of facts worth communicating to you, has
occasioned me to give a little loose to dissertation. We must be
contented to amuse, when we cannot inform.

Present my respects to Mrs. Smith, and be assured of the sincere esteem
of, dear Sir, your friend and servant.




TO MR. JAMES MAURY.

PARIS, November 13, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I received your favor of October 25, the day before
yesterday only. It would be needless for me, therefore, to add to what
you already know on the subject of peace and war. The principal
minister here is so intent on domestic improvements, and on peace, as
necessary to give leisure for them, that it will not be his fault, if
it be disturbed again. It will be equally unnecessary for me to give
you a formal attestation of your being a citizen of the United States.
Should any occasion for it arise hereafter, I shall be always ready to
certify it. With respect to tobacco, the contract with Mr. Morris and
the order of Berni cease with this year. I am obtaining an arrangement
for the five years which yet remain of the present lease to the Farmers
General, by which they will be obliged to take all the tobacco for
which they shall have occasion from America, except about one-fifth
northern, which they represent as necessary. They will be obliged to
take only such as comes directly from America, without having touched
at any European port in _French_ or _American_ bottoms, and to make the
purchase in _France_. It will be particularly watched that they
purchase not a single hogshead in England. By this I hope to have
completely effected the diverting so much of the tobacco trade as
amounts to their own consumption from England to France. I am glad to
find, also, by your letter, that this operation will have the effect to
raise the price of this commodity at the English market. 24,000
hogsheads of tobacco a year, less at that market than heretofore, must
produce some change, and it could not be for the worse. The order to
the farmers will name only 14,000 hogsheads a year, but it is certain
they must extend it themselves nearly or quite to 24,000, as their
consumption is near 30,000. I am endeavoring to bring hither also,
directly, the rice of America, consumed in this country. At present
they buy it from London. I am of opinion they could consume the whole
of what is made in America, especially if the rice States will
introduce the culture of the Piedmont and Egyptian rices also, both of
which qualities are demanded here in concurrence with that of Carolina.
I have procured for them the seed from Egypt and Piedmont. The
indulgences given to American whale oil will ensure its coming here
directly. In general, I am in hopes to ensure here the transportation
of all our commodities which come to this country in American and
French bottoms exclusively, which will countervail the effect of the
British navigation act on our carrying business. The returns in French
instead of English manufactures, will take place by degrees. Supposing
that these details cannot but be agreeable to you as a merchant and as
an American, I trouble you with them; being with much sincerity, and on
all occasions, dear Sir, your friend and servant.




TO MONSIEUR DUMAS.

PARIS, December 9, 1787.


SIR,--Your letter of November 27, showing that mine of November 14, had
not then got to hand, had given me alarm for its fate, and I had sat
down to write you a second acknowledgment of the receipt of your two
favors of October 23 and 26, and to add the receipt, also, of those of
November 14, 22 and 27. A copy of my answer of November 14 was prepared
to be enclosed to you, but in that moment came your favors of November
30, December 2d and 4th, by which I perceived that the original had at
length got safe to hand. By that you have seen all that interference,
direct or indirect, on the part of Mr. Adams and myself in the business
you had done me the honor to suggest, would be improper. Your
despatches for Mr. Jay shall go with mine in the packet of this month.
These will bring the matter into the view of Congress. In the meantime
I think it would be well to avoid exciting at Brussels or anywhere else
the least expectation thereon, because it is impossible for us to know
what that body may, in its wisdom and with all circumstances under its
eye, decide should be done. They had, in the year 1784, made up their
minds as to the system of commercial principles they wished to pursue.
These were very free. They proposed them to all the powers of Europe.
All declined except Prussia. To this general opposition they may now
find it necessary to present a very different general system to which
their treaties will form cases of exception, and they may wish to
lessen rather than multiply those cases of exception. Add to this, that
it is in contemplation to change the organization of the federal
government, and they may think it better to leave the system of foreign
connection to be formed by those who are to pursue it. I only mention
these as possible considerations, without pretending to know the
sentiments of that honorable body, or any one of its members on the
subject; and to show that no expectations should be raised which might
embarrass them or embroil ourselves. The proposed change of government
seems to be the proper topic to urge as the reason why Congress may not
at this moment choose to be forming new treaties. Should they choose
it, on the other hand, the reserve of those who act for them, while
uninstructed, cannot do injury.

I find the expectation very general that the present peace will be of
short duration. There are circumstances in favor of this opinion, there
are others against it. Certain it is that this country is in a state so
unprepared as to excite astonishment. After the last war, she seems to
have reposed on her laurels, in confidence that no power would venture
to disturb that repose.

It is presumable her present ministry will prepare to vindicate their
nation and their friends. The late events have kindled a fire, which,
though smothered of necessity for the present moment, will probably
never be quenched but by signal revenge. Individuals will, in the
meantime, have incurred sufferings which that may not repair. That
yours may be lessened for the present, and relieved in future, is the
sincere wish of him who has the honor to be, with sentiments of great
esteem and regard, Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO WILLIAM CARMICHAEL.

PARIS, December 11, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I am later in acknowledging the receipt of your favors of
October the 15th, and November the 5th and 15th, because we have been
long expecting a packet, which I hoped would bring communications worth
detailing to you; and she arrived only a few days ago, after a very
long passage indeed. I am very sorry you have not been able to make out
the cypher of my letter of September the 25th, because it contained
things which I wished you to know at that time. They have lost now a
part of their merit; but still, I wish you could decipher them, as
there remains a part, which it might yet be agreeable to you to
understand. I have examined the cypher from which it was written. It is
precisely a copy of those given to Messrs. Barclay and Lambe. In order
that you may examine whether yours corresponds, I will now translate
into cypher the three first lines of my letter of June the 14th.

[_Here follow three lines of cypher numbers._]

This will serve to show whether your cypher corresponds with mine, as
well as my manner of using it. But I shall not use it in future, till I
know from you the result of your re-examination of it. I have the honor
now, to return you the letter you had been so good as to enclose to me.
About the same time of Liston's conversation with you, similar ones
were held with me by Mr. Eden. He particularly questioned me on the
effect of our treaty with France, in the case of a war, and what might
be our dispositions. I told him without hesitation, that our treaty
obliged us to receive the armed vessels of France, with their prizes,
into our ports, and to refuse the admission of prizes made on her by
her enemies; that there was a clause by which we guaranteed to France
her American possessions, and which might, perhaps, force us into the
war, if these were attacked. "Then it will be war," said he, "for they
will assuredly be attacked." I added, that our dispositions would be to
be neutral, and that I thought it the interest of both those powers
that we should be so, because it would relieve both from all anxiety as
to the feeding their West India islands, and England would, moreover,
avoid a heavy land war on our continent, which would cripple all her
proceedings elsewhere. He expected these sentiments from me personally,
and he knew them to be analogous to those of our country. We had often
before had occasions of knowing each other: his peculiar bitterness
towards us had sufficiently appeared, and I had never concealed from
him, that I considered the British as our natural enemies, and as the
only nation on earth who wished us ill from the bottom of their souls.
And I am satisfied, that were our continent to be swallowed up by the
ocean, Great Britain would be in a bonfire from one end to the other.
Mr. Adams, as you know, has asked his recall. This has been granted,
and Colonel Smith is to return too; Congress having determined to put
an end to their commission at that court. I suspect and hope they will
make no new appointment.

Our new Constitution is powerfully attacked in the American newspapers.
The objections are, that its effect would be to form the thirteen
States into one; that, proposing to melt all down into one general
government, they have fenced the people by no declaration of rights;
they have not renounced the power of keeping a standing army; they have
not secured the liberty of the press; they have reserved the power of
abolishing trials by jury in civil cases; they have proposed that the
laws of the federal legislatures shall be paramount to the laws and
constitutions of the States; they have abandoned rotation in office;
and particularly, their President may be re-elected from four years to
four years, for life, so as to render him a King for life, like a King
of Poland; and they have not given him either the check or aid of a
council. To these they add calculations of expense, etc., etc., to
frighten the people. You will perceive that these objections are
serious, and some of them not without foundation. The Constitution,
however, has been received with a very general enthusiasm, and as far
as can be judged from external demonstrations, the bulk of the people
are eager to adopt it. In the eastern States the printers will print
nothing against it, unless the writer subscribes his name.
Massachusetts and Connecticut have called conventions in January, to
consider of it. In New York, there is a division. The Governor
(Clinton) is known to be hostile to it. Jersey, it is thought, will
certainly accept it. Pennsylvania is divided; and all the bitterness of
her factions has been kindled anew on it. But the party in favor of it
is strongest, both in and out of the legislature. This is the party
anciently of Morris, Wilson, etc. Delaware will do what Pennsylvania
shall do. Maryland is thought favorable to it; yet it is supposed Chase
and Paca will oppose it. As to Virginia, two of her Delegates, in the
first place, refused to sign it. These were Randolph, the Governor and
George Mason. Besides these, Henry, Harrison, Nelson, and the Lees, are
against it. General Washington will be for it, but it is not in his
character to exert himself much in the case. Madison will be its main
pillar; but though an immensely powerful one, it is questionable
whether he can bear the weight of such a host. So that the presumption
is, that Virginia will reject it. We know nothing of the dispositions
of the States south of this. Should it fall through, as is possible,
notwithstanding the enthusiasm with which it was received in the first
moment, it is probable that Congress will propose, that the objections
which the people shall make to it being once known, another convention
shall be assembled, to adopt the improvements generally acceptable, and
omit those found disagreeable. In this way, union may be produced under
a happy constitution, and one which shall not be too energetic, as are
the constitutions of Europe. I give you these details, because,
possibly, you may not have received them all. The sale of our western
lands is immensely successful. Five millions of acres have been sold at
private sale, for a dollar an acre, in certificates, and at the public
sales, some of them had sold as high as two dollars and forty cents the
acre. The sales had not been begun two months. By these means, taxes,
etc., our domestic debt, originally twenty-eight millions of dollars,
was reduced, by the 1st day of last October, to twelve millions, and
they were then in treaty for two millions of acres more, at a dollar,
private sale. Our domestic debt will thus be soon paid off, and that
done, the sales will go on for money, at a cheaper rate, no doubt, for
the payment of our foreign debt. The _petite guerre_ always waged by
the Indians, seems not to abate the ardor of purchase or emigration.
Kentucky is now counted at sixty thousand. Frankland is also growing
fast.

I have been told, that the cutting through the Isthmus of Panama, which
the world has so often wished, and supposed practicable, has at times
been thought of by the government of Spain, and that they once
proceeded so far, as to have a survey and examination made of the
ground; but that the result was, either impracticability or too great
difficulty. Probably the Count de Campomanes, or Don Ulloa, can give
you information on this head. I should be exceedingly pleased to get as
minute details as possible on it, and even copies of the survey,
report, etc., if they could be obtained at a moderate expense. I take
the liberty of asking your assistance in this.

I have the honor to be, with very great respect and esteem, Sir, your
most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO JOHN ADAMS.

PARIS, December 12, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--In the month of July, I received from Fiseaux & Co. of
Amsterdam, a letter notifying me that the principal of their loan to
the United States would become due the first day of January. I answered
them, that I had neither powers nor information on the subject, but
would transmit their letter to the board of treasury. I did so, by the
packet which sailed from Havre, August the 10th. The earliest answer
possible, would have been by the packet which arrived at Havre three or
four days ago. But by her I do not receive the scrip of a pen from
anybody. This makes me suppose, that my letters are committed to Paul
Jones, who was to sail a week after the departure of the packet; and
that possibly, he may be the bearer of orders from the treasury, to
repay Fiseaux's loan with the money you borrowed But it is also
possible, he may bring no order on the subject. The slowness with which
measures are adopted on our side the water, does not permit us to count
on punctual answers; but, on the contrary, renders it necessary for us
to suppose, in the present case, that no orders will arrive in time,
and to consider whether anything, and what, should be done? As it may
be found expedient to transfer all our foreign debts to Holland, by
borrowing there, and as it may always be prudent to preserve a good
credit in that country, because we may be forced into wars, whether we
will or not, I should suppose it very imprudent to suffer our credit to
be annihilated, for so small a sum as fifty-one thousand guilders. The
injury will be greater, too, in proportion to the smallness of the sum;
for they will ask, "How can a people be trusted for large sums, who
break their faith for such small ones?" You know best what effect it
will have on the minds of the money lenders of that country, should we
fail in this payment. You know best, also, whether it is practicable
and prudent for us, to have this debt paid without orders. I refer the
matter, therefore, wholly to your consideration, willing to participate
with you in any risk and any responsibility which may arise. I think it
one of those cases, where it is a duty to risk one's self. You will
perceive, by the enclosed, the necessity of an immediate answer, and
that, if you think anything can and should be done, all the necessary
authorities from you should accompany your letter. In the meantime,
should I receive any orders from the treasury by Paul Jones, I will
pursue them, and consider whatever you shall have proposed or done, as
_non avenue_.

I am, with much affection, dear sir, your most obedient, and most
humble servant.




TO JAMES MADISON.

PARIS, December 20, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--My last to you was of October the 8th, by the Count de
Moustier. Yours of July the 18th, September the 6th and October the
24th, were successively received, yesterday, the day before, and three
or four days before that. I have only had time to read the letters; the
printed papers communicated with them, however interesting, being
obliged to lie over till I finish my despatches for the packet, which
despatches must go from hence the day after to-morrow. I have much to
thank you for; first and most for the cyphered paragraph respecting
myself. These little informations are very material towards forming my
own decisions. I would be glad even to know, when any individual member
thinks I have gone wrong in any instance. If I know myself, it would
not excite ill blood in me, while it would assist to guide my conduct,
perhaps to justify it, and to keep me to my duty, alert. I must thank
you, too, for the information in Thomas Burke's case; though you will
have found by a subsequent letter, that I have asked of you a further
investigation of that matter. It is to gratify the lady who is at the
head of the convent wherein my daughters are, and who, by her
attachment and attention to them, lays me under great obligations. I
shall hope, therefore, still to receive from you the result of all the
further inquiries my second letter had asked. The parcel of rice which
you informed me had miscarried, accompanied my letter to the Delegates
of South Carolina. Mr. Bourgoin was to be the bearer of both, and both
were delivered together into the hands of his relation here, who
introduced him to me, and who, at a subsequent moment, undertook to
convey them to Mr. Bourgoin. This person was an engraver, particularly
recommended to Dr. Franklin and Mr. Hopkinson. Perhaps he may have
mislaid the little parcel of rice among his baggage. I am much pleased
that the sale of western lands is so successful. I hope they will
absorb all the certificates of our domestic debt speedily, in the first
place, and that then, offered for cash, they will do the same by our
foreign ones.

The season admitting only of operations in the cabinet, and these being
in a great measure secret, I have little to fill a letter. I will,
therefore, make up the deficiency, by adding a few words on the
Constitution proposed by our convention.

I like much the general idea of framing a government, which should go
on of itself, peaceably, without needing continual recurrence to the
State legislatures. I like the organization of the government into
legislative, judiciary and executive. I like the power given the
legislature to levy taxes, and for that reason solely, I approve of the
greater House being chosen by the people directly. For though I think a
House so chosen, will be very far inferior to the present Congress,
will be very illy qualified to legislate for the Union, for foreign
nations, etc., yet this evil does not weigh against the good, of
preserving inviolate the fundamental principle, that the people are not
to be taxed but by representatives chosen immediately by themselves. I
am captivated by the compromise of the opposite claims of the great and
little States, of the latter to equal, and the former to proportional
influence. I am much pleased, too, with the substitution of the method
of voting by person, instead of that of voting by States; and I like
the negative given to the Executive, conjointly with a third of either
House; though I should have liked it better, had the judiciary been
associated for that purpose, or invested separately with a similar
power. There are other good things of less moment. I will now tell you
what I do not like. First, the omission of a bill of rights, providing
clearly, and without the aid of sophism, for freedom of religion,
freedom of the press, protection against standing armies, restriction
of monopolies, the eternal and unremitting force of the habeas corpus
laws, and trials by jury in all matters of fact triable by the laws of
the land, and not by the laws of nations. To say, as Mr. Wilson does,
that a bill of rights was not necessary, because all is reserved in the
case of the general government which is not given, while in the
particular ones, all is given which is not reserved, might do for the
audience to which it was addressed; but it is surely a _gratis dictum_,
the reverse of which might just as well be said; and it is opposed by
strong inferences from the body of the instrument, as well as from the
omission of the cause of our present Confederation, which had made the
reservation in express terms. It was hard to conclude, because there
has been a want of uniformity among the States as to the cases triable
by jury, because some have been so incautious as to dispense with this
mode of trial in certain cases, therefore, the more prudent States
shall be reduced to the same level of calamity. It would have been much
more just and wise to have concluded the other way, that as most of the
States had preserved with jealousy this sacred palladium of liberty,
those who had wandered, should be brought back to it; and to have
established general right rather than general wrong. For I consider all
the ill as established, which may be established. I have a right to
nothing, which another has a right to take away; and Congress will have
a right to take away trials by jury in all civil cases. Let me add,
that a bill of rights is what the people are entitled to against every
government on earth, general or particular; and what no just government
should refuse, or rest on inference.

The second feature I dislike, and strongly dislike, is the abandonment,
in every instance, of the principle of rotation in office, and most
particularly in the case of the President. Reason and experience tell
us, that the first magistrate will always be reelected if he may be
re-elected. He is then an officer for life. This once observed, it
becomes of so much consequence to certain nations, to have a friend or
a foe at the head of our affairs, that they will interfere with money
and with arms. A Galloman, or an Angloman, will be supported by the
nation he befriends. If once elected, and at a second or third election
outvoted by one or two votes, he will pretend false votes, foul play,
hold possession of the reins of government, be supported by the States
voting for him, especially if they be the central ones, lying in a
compact body themselves, and separating their opponents; and they will
be aided by one nation in Europe, while the majority are aided by
another. The election of a President of America, some years hence, will
be much more interesting to certain nations of Europe, than ever the
election of a King of Poland was. Reflect on all the instances in
history, ancient and modern, of elective monarchies, and say if they do
not give foundation for my fears; the Roman Emperors, the Popes while
they were of any importance, the German Emperors till they became
hereditary in practice, the Kings of Poland, the Deys of the Ottoman
dependencies. It may be said, that if elections are to be attended with
these disorders, the less frequently they are repeated the better. But
experience says, that to free them from disorder, they must be rendered
less interesting by a necessity of change. No foreign power, nor
domestic party, will waste their blood and money to elect a person, who
must go out at the end of a short period. The power of removing every
fourth year by the vote of the people, is a power which they will not
exercise, and if they were disposed to exercise it, they would not be
permitted. The King of Poland is removable every day by the diet. But
they never remove him. Nor would Russia, the Emperor, etc., permit them
to do it. Smaller objections are, the appeals on matters of fact as
well as laws; and the binding all persons, legislative, executive, and
judiciary by oath, to maintain that constitution. I do not pretend to
decide, what would be the best method of procuring the establishment of
the manifold good things in this constitution, and of getting rid of
the bad. Whether by adopting it, in hopes of future amendment; or after
it shall have been duly weighed and canvassed by the people, after
seeing the parts they generally dislike, and those they generally
approve, to say to them, "We see now what you wish. You are willing to
give to your federal government such and such powers; but you wish, at
the same time, to have such and such fundamental rights secured to you,
and certain sources of convulsion taken away. Be it so. Send together
deputies again. Let them establish your fundamental rights by a
sacrosanct declaration, and let them pass the parts of the Constitution
you have approved. These will give powers to your federal government
sufficient for your happiness."

This is what might be said, and would probably produce a speedy, more
perfect and more permanent form of government. At all events, I hope
you will not be discouraged from making other trials, if the present
one should fail. We are never permitted to despair of the commonwealth.
I have thus told you freely what I like, and what I dislike, merely as
a matter of curiosity; for I know it is not in my power to offer matter
of information to your judgment, which has been formed after hearing
and weighing everything which the wisdom of man could offer on these
subjects. I own, I am not a friend to a very energetic government. It
is always oppressive. It places the governors indeed more at their
ease, at the expense of the people. The late rebellion in Massachusetts
has given more alarm, than I think it should have done. Calculate that
one rebellion in thirteen States in the course of eleven years, is but
one for each State in a century and a half. No country should be so
long without one. Nor will any degree of power in the hands of
government, prevent insurrections. In England, where the hand of power
is heavier than with us, there are seldom half a dozen years without an
insurrection. In France, where it is still heavier, but less despotic,
as Montesquieu supposes, than in some other countries, and where there
are always two or three hundred thousand men ready to crush
insurrections, there have been three in the course of the three years I
have been here, in every one of which greater numbers were engaged than
in Massachusetts, and a great deal more blood was spilt. In Turkey,
where the sole nod of the despot is death, insurrections are the events
of every day. Compare again the ferocious depredations of their
insurgents, with the order, the moderation and the almost
self-extinguishment of ours. And say, finally, whether peace is best
preserved by giving energy to the government, or information to the
people. This last is the most certain, and the most legitimate engine
of government. Educate and inform the whole mass of the people. Enable
them to see that it is their interest to preserve peace and order, and
they will preserve them. And it requires no very high degree of
education to convince them of this. They are the only sure reliance for
the preservation of our liberty. After all, it is my principle that the
will of the majority should prevail. If they approve the proposed
constitution in all its parts, I shall concur in it cheerfully, in
hopes they will amend it, whenever they shall find it works wrong. This
reliance cannot deceive us, as long as we remain virtuous; and I think
we shall be so, as long as agriculture is our principal object, which
will be the case, while there remains vacant lands in any part of
America. When we get piled upon one another in large cities, as in
Europe, we shall become corrupt as in Europe, and go to eating one
another as they do there. I have tired you by this time with
disquisitions which you have already heard repeated by others a
thousand and a thousand times; and therefore, shall only add assurances
of the esteem and attachment with which I have the honor to be, dear
Sir, your affectionate friend and servant.

P. S. The instability of our laws is really an immense evil. I think it
would be well to provide in our constitutions, that there shall always
be a twelvemonth between the engrossing a bill and passing it; that it
should then be offered to its passage without changing a word; and that
if circumstances should be thought to require a speedier passage, it
should take two-thirds of both Houses, instead of a bare majority.




TO E. CARRINGTON.

PARIS, Dec. 21, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I have just received your two favors of October the 23d and
November the 10th. I am much obliged to you for your hints in the
Danish business. They are the only information I have on that subject,
except the resolution of Congress, and warn me of a rock on which I
should most certainly have split. The vote plainly points out an agent,
only leaving it to my discretion to substitute another. My judgment
concurs with that of Congress as to his fitness. But I shall inquire
for the surest banker at Copenhagen to receive the money, not because I
should have had any doubts, but because I am informed others have them.
Against the failure of a banker, were such an accident, or any similar
one to happen, I cannot be held accountable in a case where I act
without particular interest. My principal idea in proposing the
transfer of the French debt, was, to obtain on the new loans a much
longer day for the reimbursement of the principal, hoping that the
resources of the United States could have been equal to the article of
interest alone. But I shall endeavor to quiet, as well as I can, those
interested. A part of them will probably sell out at any rate; and one
great claimant may be expected to make a bitter attack on our honor. I
am very much pleased to hear, that our western lands sell so
successfully. I turn to this precious resource, as that which will, in
every event, liberate us from our domestic debt, and perhaps too, from
our foreign one; and this, much sooner than I had expected. I do not
think any thing could have been done with them in Europe. Individual
speculators and sharpers had duped so many with their unlocated
land-warrants, that every offer would have been suspected.

As to the new Constitution, I find myself nearly a neutral. There is a
great mass of good in it, in a very desirable form; but there is also,
to me, a bitter pill or two. I have written somewhat lengthily to Mr.
Madison on this subject, and will take the liberty to refer you to that
part of my letter to him. I will add one question to what I have said
there. Would it not have been better to assign to Congress exclusively
the article of imposts for federal purposes, and to have left direct
taxation exclusively to the States? I should suppose the former fund
sufficient for all probable events, aided by the land office.

The form which the affairs of Europe may assume, is not yet
decipherable by those out of the cabinet. The Emperor gives himself, at
present, the air of a mediator. This is necessary to justify a breach
with the Porte. He has his eye at the same time on Germany, and
particularly on Bavaria, the Elector of which has, for a long time,
been hanging over the grave. Probably, France would now consent to the
exchange of the Austrian Netherlands, to be created into a kingdom for
the Duke de Deuxports, against the electorate of Bavaria. This will
require a war. The Empress longs for Turkey, and viewing France as her
principal obstacle, would gladly negotiate her acquiescence. To spur on
this, she is coquetting it with England. The King of Prussia, too, is
playing a double game between France and England. But I suppose the
former incapable of forgiving him, or of ever reposing confidence in
him. Perhaps the spring may unfold to us the final arrangement which
will take place among the powers of this continent.

I often doubt whether I should trouble Congress or my friends with
these details of European politics. I know they do not excite that
interest in America, of which it is impossible for one to divest
himself here. I know, too, that it is a maxim with us, and I think it a
wise one, not to entangle ourselves with the affairs of Europe. Still,
I think, we should know them. The Turks have practiced the same maxim
of not meddling in the complicated wrangles of this continent. But they
have unwisely chosen to be ignorant of them also, and it is this total
ignorance of Europe, its combinations and its movements, which exposes
them to that annihilation possibly about taking place. While there are
powers in Europe which fear our views, or have views on us, we should
keep an eye on them, their connections and oppositions, that in a
moment of need, we may avail ourselves of their weakness with respect
to others as well as ourselves, and calculate their designs and
movements, on all the circumstances under which they exist. Though I am
persuaded, therefore, that these details are read by many with great
indifference, yet I think it my duty to enter into them, and to run the
risk of giving too much, rather than too little information. I have the
honor to be, with perfect esteem and respect, dear Sir, your most
obedient and most humble servant.

P. S. The resolution of Congress, relative to the prize money received
here, speaks of that money as paid to me. I hope this matter is
properly understood. The treasury board desired me to receive it, and
apply it to such and such federal purposes; and they would pay the
dividends of the claimants in America. This would save the expense of
remittance. I declined, however, receiving the money, and ordered it
into the hands of their banker, who paid it away for the purposes to
which they had destined it. I should be sorry, an idea should get
abroad, that I had received the money of these poor fellows, and
applied it to other purposes. I shall, in like manner, order the Danish
and Barbary money into the hands of bankers, carefully avoiding ever to
touch a sou of it, or having any other account to make out than what
the banker will furnish.




TO THE HON. JOHN JAY.

PARIS, Dec. 21, 1787.


SIR,--The last letters I had the honor of addressing you were of the 3d
and 7th of November. Your several favors, to wit, two of July 27, two
of Oct. 24, and one of Nov. 3, have all been delivered within the
course of a week past; and I embrace the earliest occasion of returning
to Congress my sincere thanks for the new proofs I receive therein of
their confidence in me, and of assuring them of my best endeavors to
merit it. The several matters on which I receive instruction shall all
be duly attended to. The Commissioners of the Treasury inform me they
will settle the balance appropriated to the Barbary business, apprise
me of it, and place it under my power. The moment this is done, I will
take the measures necessary to effect the instructions of Congress. The
letter to you from the Governor of Rhode Island desires my attention to
the application of the claimants of the brig Apollonia, which shall
surely be complied with. I trust that an application will be made by
the claimants. It will be the more important, as the letter in this
case, as in that of the sloop Sally, formerly recommended to me, is
directed to an advocate whom all my endeavors have not enabled me to
find. I fear, therefore, that the papers in both cases must remain in
my hands till called for by the person whom the parties shall employ
for the ordinary solicitation and management of their appeals. I
suppose they will engage some person to answer from time to time the
pecuniary demands of lawyers, clerks, and other officers of the courts,
to wait upon the judges and explain their cases to them, which is the
usage here, to instruct their lawyers and confer with them whenever
necessary, and in general to give all those attentions which the
solicitation of private causes constantly require here. Their
management, indeed, is very much a matter of intrigue and of money.

The public affairs of Europe are quiet at present, except as between
the Turks and Russians; and, even these, some people suppose may be
quieted. It is thought that Russia would accommodate easily. The peace
between France and England is very generally considered as insecure. It
is said the latter is not honestly disarming; she is certainly
augmenting her land forces, and the speech of the King, and debates of
the court members, prove their diffidence in the late accommodation.
Yet it is believed their premier is a friend to peace, and there can be
no doubt of the same dispositions in the chief minister here. The
divisions continue between the King and his parliament. A promise has
been obtained for convoking the States General, as early as 1791, at
farthest. The embarrassments in the department of finance are not yet
so cleared up as that the public can see their way through them. The
arrival of the Count de La Luzerne, just now announced, will probably
put their marine operations into new activity.

I have the honor to enclose you three letters from Mr. Dumas. By one of
the 23d of October, he proposed to me that Mr. Adams and myself should
authorize him to go to Brussels on the subject he explains to you. I
wrote him the answer of Nov. 14th, by which I expected he would see
that nothing could be done, and think no more of it. His subsequent
letters, however, giving me reason to apprehend that, making too sure
of the expediency of the treaty he proposed, he might excite
expectations from that government, I wrote him the letter of Dec. 9 to
suggest to him that this proposition might not be so certainly eligible
as he seemed to expect, and to advise him to avoid doing anything which
might commit or embarrass Congress. The uneasiness of his present
situation, and the desire of a refuge from it, had probably suggested
to him this idea, and occasioned him to view it with partiality.

This will be accompanied with the gazettes of France and Leyden. There
being no passenger to go by the packet, within my knowledge, this
letter will go through the post-office. I shall, therefore, only add
assurances of the esteem and respect with which I have the honor to be,
Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MONSIEUR LIMOZIN.

PARIS, December 22, 1787.


SIR,--I have the honor now, to acknowledge the receipt of your favors
of the 18th and 19th of November, and two of the 18th of the present
month. I did not write to you immediately on the receipt of the two
first, because the observations they contained were to be acted on
here. I was much obliged to you for them, as I have been frequently
before for others, and you will find that I have profited by them in
the _Arret_ which is to come out for the regulation of our commerce,
wherein most of the things are provided for, which you have from time
to time recommended. With respect to the article of yellow wax, I think
there is a general clause in the _Arret_, which will take it in; but I
am not sure of it. If there be not, it is now too late to get any
alteration made. You shall receive the _Arret_ the moment it is
communicated to me.

I have examined the case of Captain Thomas, with all the dispositions
possible to interpose for him. But on mature reflection, I find it is
one of those cases wherein my solicitation would be ill received. The
government of France, to secure to its subjects the carrying trade
between her colonies and the mother country, have made a law,
forbidding any foreign vessels to undertake to carry between them.
Notwithstanding this, an American vessel has undertaken, and has
brought a cargo. For me to ask that this vessel shall be received,
would be to ask a repeal of the law, because there is no more reason
for receiving her, than there will be for receiving the second, third,
etc., which shall act against the same law, nor for receiving an
American vessel, more than the vessels of any other nations. Captain
Thomas has probably engaged in this business, not knowing the law; but
ignorance of the law is no excuse, in any country. If it were, the laws
would lose their effect, because it can be always pretended. Were I to
make this application to the Comptroller General, he might possibly ask
me, whether, in a like case, of a French vessel in America acting
through ignorance, against law, we would suspend the law as to her? I
should be obliged honestly to answer, that with us, there is no power
which can suspend the law for a moment; and Captain Thomas knows that
this answer would be the truth. The Senegal company seems to be as much
engaged in it as he is. I should suppose his most probable means of
extrication would be with their assistance, and availing himself of
their privileges, and the apparent authority he has received from the
officers of government there. I am sorry his case is such a one as I
cannot present to the minister. A jealousy of our taking away their
carrying trade, is the principal reason which obstructs our admission
into their West India islands. It would not be right for me to
strengthen that jealousy.

I have the honor to be, with much esteem, Sir, your most obedient
humble servant.




TO THE BOARD OF TREASURY.

PARIS, Dec. 30, 1787.


GENTLEMEN,--In my letter of Aug. 5, I had the honor of enclosing to you
a letter written me by Messrs. Fiseaux & Co., reminding us that the
principal of the loan of 51,000 florins obtained by them, would become
due on the first day of the ensuing year. A few days ago, I received
another from them calling for the money. At first I was disposed to
answer them that I was in nowise authorized to do anything in it, and
that it rested with you altogether. But, on consulting with some
persons better acquainted with the delicacy of credit in Holland, I
found there was reason to fear that a failure to pay that money might
not only do essential injury to our credit in general, but even hinder
the progress of the loan going on in the hands of Willincks and Van
Staphorsts; and that it would be for the interest of that loan itself,
to pay this demand out of it, if possible. I wrote, therefore, to Mr.
Adams, to consult him about it, and to know, if he was of the same
opinion, whether he would venture to join me in directing such an
application of the money. I wrote at the same to Willincks and Van
Staphorsts, to know whether they could have as much in their hands to
spare, and whether they would venture to pay it on our order. Mr. Adams
approved of the proposition, and was willing to join in ordering the
payment. Willincks and Van Staphorsts answered that they had in their
hands money enough to pay the February interest of the former loan, and
to answer, for some time yet, Mr. Adams' and my draughts for our
subsistence; but that if they should pay the principal of Fiseaux's
loan, it would be an advance of their own: they likewise observed, that
to pay such a sum without your orders, placed them under an unnecessary
responsibility. Upon this, I concluded to ask them only to pay this
year's interest, now becoming due, to desire Fiseaux to receive this,
and with it to endeavor to quiet the creditors till your orders could
be received. I have this day written to Fiseaux, and to Willincks and
Van Staphorsts to this purpose, and avail myself of a vessel about to
sail from Havre, to communicate the whole transaction to you, and to
express my wish that you will be pleased to give an answer to Fiseaux.
I enclose to you his letters to me on the subject. From what I can
learn, I suspect that if there were a cordial understanding between the
Willincks and Van Staphorsts, if the former had been as well disposed
as the latter, the matter would have been settled with Fiseaux. I have
the honor to be, with much respect, Gentlemen, your most obedient, and
most humble servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

PARIS, December 31, 1787.


SIR,--Since the receipt of the letter of Monsieur de Calonnes, of
October the 22d, 1786, I have several times had the honor of mentioning
to you, that I was endeavoring to get the substance of that letter
reduced into an _Arret_, which, instead of being revocable by a single
letter of a Comptroller General, would require an _Arret_ to repeal or
alter it, and of course must be discussed in full Council, and so give
time to prevent it. This has been pressed as much as it could be with
prudence. One cause of delay has been the frequent changes of the
Comptroller General; as we had always our whole work to begin again
with every new one. Monsieur Lambert's continuance in office for some
months, has enabled us, at length, to get through the business; and I
have just received from him a letter, and the _Arret_ duly
authenticated; of which I have the honor to send you a number of
printed copies. You will find that the several alterations and
additions are made, which, on my visit to the sea-ports, I had found to
be necessary, and which my letters of June the 21st and August the 6th,
particularly mentioned to you. Besides these, we have obtained some new
articles of value, for which openings arose in the course of the
negotiation. I say _we_ have done it, because the Marquis de La Fayette
has gone hand in hand with me through this business, and has been a
most invaluable aid. I take the liberty of making some observations on
the articles of the _Arret_, severally, for their explanation, as well
as for the information of Congress.

Article 1. In the course of our conferences with the Comptroller
General, we had prevailed on him to pass this article with a
suppression of all duty. When he reported the _Arret_, however, to the
Council, this suppression was objected to, and it was insisted to
re-establish the duties of seven livres and ten sous, and of ten sous
the livre, reserved in the letter of M. de Calonnes. The passage of the
_Arret_ was stopped, and the difficulty communicated to me. I urged
everything I could, in letters and in conferences, to convince them
that whale oil was an article which could bear no duty at all. That if
the duty fell on the consumer, he would choose to buy vegetable oils;
if on the fisherman, he could no longer live by his calling, remaining
in his own country; and that if he quitted his own country, the
circumstances of vicinity, sameness of language, laws, religion and
manners, and perhaps the ties of kindred, would draw him to Nova
Scotia, in spite of every encouragement which could be given at
Dunkirk; and that thus those fishermen would be shifted out of a scale
friendly to France, into one always hostile. Nothing, however, could
prevail. It hung on this article alone, for two months, during which we
risked the total loss of the _Arret_, on the stability in office of
Monsieur Lambert; for if he had gone out, his successor might be less
favorable; and if Monsieur Neckar were the successor, we might lose the
whole, as he never set any store by us, or the connection with us.
About ten days ago, it became universally believed that Monsieur
Lambert was to go out immediately. I, therefore, declined further
insisting on the total suppression, and desired the _Arret_ might pass,
leaving the duties on whale oil as Monsieur de Calonnes had promised
them; but with a reservation, which may countenance our bringing on
this matter again, at a more favorable moment.

Article 2. The other fish oils are placed in a separate article;
because whatever encouragements we may hereafter obtain for whale oils,
they will not be extended to those which their own fisheries produce.

Article 3. A company had silently, and by unfair means, obtained a
monopoly for the making and selling spermaceti candles: as soon as we
discovered it, we solicited its suppression, which is effected by this
clause.

Article 4. The duty of an eighth per cent. is merely to oblige the
masters of vessels to enter their cargoes, for the information of
government; without inducing them to attempt to smuggle.

Article 6. Tar, pitch and turpentine of America, coming in competition
with the same articles produced in the south-western parts of France,
we could obtain no greater reduction, than two and a-half per cent. The
duties before, were from four to six times that amount.

Article 10. The right of entrepÙt given by this article, is almost the
same thing, as the making all their ports, free ports for us. The ships
are, indeed, subject to be visited, and the cargoes must be reported in
ports of entrepÙt, which need not be done in the free ports. But the
communication between the entrepÙt and the country, is not interrupted
by continual search of all persons passing into the country, which has
proved so troublesome to the inhabitants of our free ports, as that a
considerable proportion of them have wished to give back the privilege
of their freedom.

Article 13. This article gives us the privileges and advantages of
native subjects, in all their possessions in Asia, and in the _scales
leading thereto_. This expression means at present the isles of France
and Bourbon, and will include the Cape of Good Hope, should any future
event put it into the hands of France. It was with a view to this, that
I proposed the expression, because we were then in hourly expectation
of a war, and it was suspected that France would take possession of
that place. It will, in no case, be considered as including anything
westward of the Cape of Good Hope. I must observe further, on this
article, that it will only become valuable on the suppression of their
East India Company; because, as long as their monopoly continues, even
native subjects cannot enter their Asiatic ports for the purposes of
commerce. It is considered, however, as certain, that this Company will
be immediately suppressed.

The article of tobacco could not be introduced into the _Arret_;
because it was necessary to consider the Farmers General as parties to
that arrangement. It rests, therefore, of necessity, on the basis of a
letter only. You will perceive that this is nothing more than a
continuation of the order of Berni, only leaving the prices unfixed;
and like that, it will require a constant and vexatious attention to
have its execution enforced.

The States who have much to carry, and few carriers, will observe,
perhaps, that the benefits of these regulations are somewhat narrowed
by confining them to articles brought hither in French or American
bottoms. But they will consider that nothing in these instruments moves
from us. The advantages they hold out are all given by this country to
us, and the givers will modify their gifts as they please. I suppose it
to be a determined principle of this court not to suffer our carrying
business, so far as their consumption of our commodities extends, to
become a nursery for British seamen. Nor would this, perhaps, be
advantageous to us, considering the dispositions of the two nations
towards us. The preference which our shipping will obtain on this
account, may counterpoise the discouragements it experiences from the
aggravated dangers of the Barbary States. Nor is the idea unpleasing
which shows itself in various parts of these papers, of naturalizing
American bottoms, and American citizens in France and in its foreign
possessions. Once established here, and in their eastern settlements,
they may revolt less at the proposition to extend it to those westward.
They are not yet, however, at that point; we must be contented to go
towards it a step at a time, and trust to future events for hastening
our progress.

With respect to the alliance between this and the two imperial courts,
nothing certain transpires. We are enabled to conjecture its progress
only from facts which now and then show themselves. The following may
be considered as indications of it. 1. The Emperor has made an attempt
to surprise Belgrade. The attempt failed, but will serve to plunge him
into the war, and to show that he had assumed the character of
mediator, only to enable himself to gain some advantage by surprise. 2.
The mediation of France is probably at an end, and their abandonment of
the Turks agreed on; because they have secretly ordered their officers
to quit the Turkish service. This fact is known to but few, and not
intended to be known; but I think it certain. 3. To the offer of
mediation lately made by England and Prussia, the court of Petersburg
answered, that having declined the mediation of a friendly power,
(France,) she could not accept that of two courts, with whose
dispositions she had reason to be dissatisfied. 4. The States General
are said to have instructed their Ambassador here, lately, to ask of M.
de Montmorin, whether the inquiry had been made, which they had
formerly desired: "By what authority the French engineers had been
placed in the service of Holland?" And that he answered that the
inquiry had not been made, nor should be made. Though I do not consider
the channel through which I get this fact, as absolutely sure, yet it
is so respectable that I give credit to it myself. 5. The King of
Prussia is withdrawing his troops from Holland. Should this alliance
show itself, it would seem that France thus strengthened might dictate
the re-establishment of the affairs of Holland in her own form. For it
is not conceivable that Prussia would dare to move, nor that England
would alone undertake such a war, and for such a purpose. She appears,
indeed, triumphant at present, but the question is who will triumph
last?

I enclose you a letter from Mr. Dumas. I received one from him myself,
wherein he assures me that no difficulties shall be produced, by what
he had suggested relative to his mission to Brussels. The gazettes of
France and Leyden to this date accompany this letter, which, with the
several papers put under your cover, I shall send to M. Limozin, our
agent at Havre, to be forwarded by the Juno, Captain Jenkins, which
sails from that port for New York, on the 3d of January.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem and
respect, Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MONSIEUR LAMBERT.

PARIS, January 3, 1788.


SIR,--I am honored with your Excellency's letter of the 29th of
December, enclosing the _Arret_ on the commerce between France and the
United States. I availed myself of the occasion of a vessel sailing
this day from Havre for New York, to forward it to Congress. They will
receive with singular satisfaction this new testimony of his Majesty's
friendship for the United States, of his dispositions to promote their
interest, and to strengthen the bands which connect the two nations.

Permit me, Sir, to return you, personally, my sincere thanks for the
great attention you have paid to this subject, for the sacrifices you
have kindly made, of time so precious as yours, every moment of which
is demanded and is occupied by objects interesting to the happiness of
millions; and to proffer you the homage of those sincere sentiments of
attachment and respect with which I have the honor to be, your
Excellency's most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MONSIEUR DE QUESNAY.

PARIS, January 6, 1788.


SIR,--I have never expressed an objection to the part of your plan
relative to the theatre. The utility of this in America is a great
question on which I may be allowed to have an opinion; but it is not
for me to decide on it, nor to object to the proposal of establishing
one at Richmond. The only objection to your plan which I have ever
made, is that contained in my letter to you. I feared it was too
extensive for the poverty of the country. You remove the objection by
observing, it is to extend to several States. Whether professors
itinerant from one State to another may succeed, I am unable to say,
having never known an experiment of it. The fear that these professors
may be disappointed in their expectations, has determined me not to
meddle in the business at all. Knowing how much people going to America
overrate the resources of living there, I have made a point never to
encourage any person to go there, that I may not partake of the censure
which may follow their disappointment. I beg you, therefore, not to
alter your plan in any part of it on my account, but permit me to
pursue mine of being absolutely neutral. Monsieur de La Luzerne and the
Marquis de La Fayette, know too much of the country themselves to need
any information from me, or any reference to my opinion; and the
friendly dispositions which they have towards you, will insure you
their good offices. Convinced of the honesty of your intentions and of
your zeal, I wish you every possible success, and shall be really happy
to see your plan answer your expectations. You have more courage than I
have, to take upon yourself the risk of transplanting and contenting so
many persons. I beg you to be assured of the sincerity of the esteem
with which I have the honor to be, Sir, your most obedient, and most
humble servant.




TO MR. DRAYTON.

PARIS, January 13, 1788.


SIR,--By Captain Shewell, who is sailing about this time from
Marseilles to Charleston, I directed to be forwarded to you one of two
couffes of rough rice, which I had brought from Egypt. The other came
on to me here, and will be carried from Havre to New York, addressed to
you, to the care of the Delegates of South Carolina in Congress. I wish
both may arrive in time for the approaching seed time, and that the
trials with this and the Piedmont rice may furnish new advantages to
your agriculture. I have considerable hopes of receiving some dry rice
from Cochin-China, the young Prince of that country, lately gone from
hence, having undertaken that it shall come to me. But it will be some
time first. These are all but experiments; the precept, however, is
wise which directs us to try all things, and hold fast that which is
good.

Your letter of May the 22d, 1787, informs me that mine of May the 6th,
1786, had never got to hand. I now have the honor to enclose you a copy
of it, of no other consequence than to show you that I was incapable of
so insensible an inattention as the miscarriage of that letter exposed
me to the charge of in your mind. I shall take opportunities of
forwarding to you more of the seed of the Spanish Saintfoine, some of
which I have received directly from Malta. I have the honor to be, with
sentiments of the most perfect esteem and respect, Sir, your most
obedient, and most humble servant.




TO LE COMTE BERNSTORFF, MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS, COPENHAGEN.

PARIS, January 21, 1788.


SIR,--I am instructed by the United States of America, in Congress
assembled, to bring again under the consideration of his Majesty, the
King of Denmark, and of his ministers, the case of the three prizes
taken from the English during the late war, by an American squadron
under the command of Commodore Paul Jones, put into Bergen in distress,
there rescued from our possession by orders from the court of Denmark,
and delivered back to the English. Dr. Franklin, then Minister
Plenipotentiary from the United States at the court of Versailles, had
the honor of making applications to the court of Denmark, for a just
indemnification to the persons interested, and particularly by a letter
of the 22d of December, 1779, a copy of which I have now the honor of
enclosing to your Excellency. In consequence of this, a sum of ten
thousand pounds was proposed to him, as an indemnification, through the
Baron de Waltersdorff, then at Paris. The departure of both those
gentlemen from this place, soon after, occasioned an intermission in
the correspondence on this subject. But the United States continue to
be very sensibly affected by this delivery of their prizes to Great
Britain, and the more so, as no part of their conduct had forfeited
their claim to those rights of hospitality which civilized nations
extend to each other. Not only a sense of justice due to the
individuals interested in those prizes, but also an earnest desire that
no subject of discontent may check the cultivation and progress of that
friendship which they wish may subsist and increase between the two
countries, prompt them to remind his Majesty of the transaction in
question; and they flatter themselves that his Majesty will concur with
them in thinking, that as restitution of the prizes is not practicable,
it is reasonable and just that he should render, and that they should
accept, a compensation equivalent to the value of them. And the same
principles of justice towards the parties, and of amity to the United
States, which influenced the breast of his Majesty to make, through the
Baron de Waltersdorff, the proposition of a particular sum, will surely
lead him to restore their full value, if that were greater, as is
believed, than the sum proposed. In order to obtain, therefore, a final
arrangement of this demand, Congress have authorized me to depute a
special agent to Copenhagen, to attend the pleasure of his Majesty. No
agent could be so adequate to this business, as the Commodore Paul
Jones, who commanded the squadron which took the prizes. He will,
therefore, have the honor of delivering this letter to your Excellency,
in person; of giving such information as may be material, relative to
the whole transaction; of entering into conferences for its final
adjustment, and, being himself principally interested, not only in his
own right, but as the natural patron of those who fought under him,
whatever shall be satisfactory to him, will have a great right to that
ultimate approbation, which Congress have been pleased to confide to
me.

I beg your Excellency to accept the homage of that respect which your
exalted station, talents, and merit impress, as well as those
sentiments of esteem and regard with which I have the honor to be, your
Excellency's most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MR. WILLIAM RUTLEDGE.

PARIS, Feb. 2, 1788.


DEAR SIR,--I should sooner have answered your favor of Jan. the 2d, but
that we have expected for some time to see you here. I beg you not to
think of the trifle I furnished you with, nor to propose to return it,
till you shall have that sum more than you know what to do with. And on
every other occasion of difficulty, I hope you will make use of me
freely. I presume you will now remain at London, to see the trial of
Hastings. Without suffering yourself to be imposed on by the pomp in
which it will be enveloped, I would recommend to you to consider and
decide for yourself these questions. If his offence is to be decided by
the law of the land, why is he not tried in that court in which his
fellow-citizens are tried, that is, the King's bench? If he is cited
before another court, that he may be judged, not according to the law
of the land, but by the discretion of his judges, is he not
disfranchised of his most precious right, the benefit of the laws of
his country, in common with his fellow-citizens? I think you will find,
in investigating this subject, that every solid argument is against the
extraordinary court, and that every one in its favor is specious only.
It is a transfer from a judicature of learning and integrity, to one,
the greatness of which is both illiterate and unprincipled. Yet such is
the force of prejudice with some, and of the want of reflection in
others, that many of our constitutions have copied this absurdity,
without suspecting it to be one. I am glad to hear that our new
Constitution is pretty sure of being accepted by States enough to
secure the good it contains, and to meet with such opposition in some
others, as to give us hopes it will be accommodated to them, by the
amendment of its most glaring faults, particularly the want of a
declaration of rights.

The long expected edict of the Protestants, at length appears here. Its
analysis is this. It is an acknowledgment (hitherto withheld by the
laws) that Protestants can beget children, and that they can die, and
be offensive unless buried. It does not give them permission to think,
to speak, or to worship. It enumerates the humiliations to which they
shall remain subject, and the burthens to which they shall continue to
be unjustly exposed. What are we to think of the condition of the human
mind in a country, where such a wretched thing as this has thrown the
State into convulsions, and how must we bless our own situation in a
country, the most illiterate peasant of which is a Solon, compared with
the authors of this law. There is modesty often, which does itself
injury; our countrymen possess this. They do not know their own
superiority. You see it; you are young, you have time and talents to
correct them. Study the subject while in Europe, in all the instances
which will present themselves to you, and profit your countrymen of
them, by making them to know and value themselves.

Adieu, my dear Sir, and be assured of the esteem with which I am your
friend and servant.




TO HIS EXCELLENCY MR. ADAMS.

PARIS, Feb. 6, 1788.


DEAR SIR,--The Commissioners of the Treasury have given notice to
Willincks and Van Staphorsts, that they shall not be able to remit them
one shilling till the New Government gets into action, and that
therefore the sole resource for the payment of the Dutch interest till
that period is in the progress of the last loan. Willinck and Van
Staphorst reply that there is not the least probability of raising as
much on that loan as will pay the next June interest, and that, if that
payment fails one day, it will do an injury to our credit, which a very
long time will not wipe off. A Mr. Stanitski, one of our brokers, who
holds $4,340,000 of our domestic debt, offers, if we will pay him one
year's interest of that debt, he will have the whole of the loan
immediately filled up, that is to say, he will procure the sum of six
hundred and twenty-two thousand eight hundred and forty florins still
unsubscribed. His year's interest (deducting from it ten per cent.
which he will allow for payment in Europe instead of America) will
require one hundred and eighty thousand florins of this money. Messrs.
Willinck and Van Staphorsts say that, by this means, they can pay
Fiseaux' debt, and all the Dutch interest, and our current expenses
here, till June, 1789, by which time the New Government may be in
action. They have proposed this to the Commissioners of the Treasury;
But it is possible that the delay of letters going and coming, with the
time necessary between the receiving their answer and procuring the
money, may force the decision of this proposition on me at the eleventh
hour. I wish, therefore, to avail myself of your counsel before your
departure, on this proposition. Your knowledge of the subject enables
you to give the best opinion, and your zeal for the public interest,
and I trust your friendly disposition towards me will prompt you to
assist me with your advice on this question, to wit, if the answer of
the Commissioners does not come in time, and there shall appear no
other means of raising the June interest, will it be worse to fail in
that payment, or to accept of about seven hundred thousand florins, on
the condition of letting one hundred and eighty thousand be applied to
the payment of a year's interest of a part of our domestic debt? Do me
the friendship to give me an answer to this as soon as possible, and be
assured of the sentiments of esteem and respect with which I have the
honor to be, dear Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO THE COMMISSIONERS OF THE TREASURY.

PARIS, Feb. 7, 1788.


GENTLEMEN,--Your favors of November the 10th and 13th, and December the
5th, have been duly received. Commodore Jones left this place for
Copenhagen, the 5th instant, to carry into execution the resolution of
Congress of October the 25th. Whatever moneys that court shall be
willing to allow, shall be remitted to your bankers, either in
Amsterdam or Paris, as shall be found most beneficial, allowing
previously to be withdrawn Commodore Jones' proportion, which will be
necessary for his subsistence. I desired him to endeavor to prevail on
the Danish Minister to have the money paid in Amsterdam or Paris, by
their banker in either of those cities, if they have one.

M. Ast (secretary to the consulate) is at L'Orient. Whether he comes up
with the papers, or sends them, they shall be received, sealed up and
taken care of. I will only ask the favor of you, that I may never be
desired to break the seals, unless very important cause for it should
arise.

I have just received from Messrs. Willincks and Van Staphorsts, a
letter of January the 31st, in which are these words: "The official
communication we have of the actual situation and prospect of the
finances of the United States, would render such a partial payment as
that to Fiseaux' house of no avail towards the support of the public
credit, unless effectual measures shall be adopted, to provide funds
for the two hundred and seventy thousand florins, interest, that will
be due the 1st of June next; a single day's retard in which would
ground a prejudice of long duration." They informed me, at the same
time, that they had made to you the following communication: that Mr.
Stanitski, our principal broker, and holder of thirteen hundred and
forty thousand dollars, of certificates of our domestic debt, offers to
have our loan of a million of guilders (of which six hundred and
twenty-two thousand eight hundred and forty are still unfilled)
immediately made up, on condition that he may retain thereout, one
hundred and eighty thousand guilders, being one year's interest on his
certificates, allowing a deduction of ten per cent. from his said
interest, as a compensation for his receiving it in Amsterdam instead
of America, and not pretending that this shall give him any title to
ask for any payment of future interest in Europe. They observe, that
this will enable them to face the demands of Dutch interest, till the
1st of June, 1789, pay the principal of Fiseaux' debt, and supply the
current expenses of your legation in Europe. On these points, it is for
you to decide. I will only take the liberty to observe, that if they
shall receive your acceptance of the proposition, some day's credit
will still be to be given for producing the cash, and that this must be
produced fifteen days before it is wanting, because that much previous
notice is always given to the creditors that their money is ready. It
is, therefore, but three months from this day, before your answer
should be in Amsterdam. It might answer a useful purpose also, could I
receive a communication of that answer, ten days earlier than they. The
same stagnation attending our passage from the old to the new form of
government, which stops the feeble channel of money hitherto flowing
towards our treasury, has suspended also what foreign credit we had. So
that, at this moment, we may consider the progress of our loan as
stopped. Though much an enemy to the system of borrowing, yet I feel
strongly the necessity of preserving the power to borrow, Without this,
we might be overwhelmed by another nation, merely by the force of its
credit. However, you can best judge whether the payment of a single
year's interest on Stanitski's certificates, in Europe, instead of
America, may be more injurious to us than the shock of our credit in
Amsterdam, which may be produced by a failure to pay our interest.

I have only to offer any services which I can render in this business,
either here or by going to Holland, at a moment's warning, if that
should be necessary.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem and
respect, Gentlemen, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO DOCTOR PRICE.

PARIS, February 7, 1788.


DEAR SIR,--It is rendering mutual service to men of virtue and
understanding to make them acquainted with one another. I need no other
apology for presenting to your notice the bearer hereof, Mr. Barlow. I
know you were among the first who read the Visions of Columbus, while
yet in manuscript; and think the sentiments I heard you express of that
poem will induce you to be pleased with the acquaintance of their
author. He comes to pass a few days only at London, merely to know
something of it. As I have little acquaintance there, I cannot do
better for him than to ask you to be so good as to make him known to
such persons, as his turn and his time might render desirable to him.

I thank you for the volume you were so kind as to send me some time
ago. Everything you write is precious, and this volume is on the most
precious of all our concerns. We may well admit morality to be the
child of the understanding rather than of the senses, when we observe
that it becomes dearer to us as the latter weaken, and as the former
grows stronger by time and experience, till the hour arrives in which
all other objects lose all their value. That that hour may be distant
with you, my friend, and that the intermediate space may be filled with
health and happiness, is the sincere prayer of him who is, with
sentiments of great respect and friendship, dear Sir, your most
obedient humble servant.




TO MR. A. DONALD.

PARIS, February 7, 1788.


DEAR SIR,--I received duly your friendly letter of November the 12th.
By this time, you will have seen published by Congress the new
regulations obtained from this court, in favor of our commerce. You
will observe, that the arrangement relative to tobacco is a
continuation of the order of Berni for five years, only leaving the
price to be settled between the buyer and seller. You will see, too,
that all contracts for tobacco are forbidden, till it arrives in
France. Of course, your proposition for a contract is precluded. I fear
the prices here will be low, especially if the market be crowded. You
should be particularly attentive to the article, which requires that
the tobacco should come in French or American bottoms, as this article
will, in no instance, be departed from.

I wish with all my soul, that the nine first conventions may accept the
new constitution, because this will secure to us the good it contains,
which I think great and important. But I equally wish, that the four
latest conventions, whichever they be, may refuse to accede to it, till
a declaration of rights be annexed. This would probably command the
offer of such a declaration, and thus give to the whole fabric,
perhaps, as much perfection as any one of that kind ever had. By a
declaration of rights, I mean one which shall stipulate freedom of
religion, freedom of the press, freedom of commerce against monopolies,
trial by juries in all cases, no suspensions of the habeas corpus, no
standing armies. These are fetters against doing evil, which no honest
government should decline. There is another strong feature in the new
Constitution, which I as strongly dislike. That is, the perpetual
re-eligibility of the President. Of this I expect no amendment at
present, because I do not see that anybody has objected to it on your
side the water. But it will be productive of cruel distress to our
country, even in your day and mine. The importance to France and
England, to have our government in the hands of a friend or a foe, will
occasion their interference by money, and even by arms. Our President
will be of much more consequence to them than a King of Poland. We must
take care, however, that neither this, nor any other objection to the
new form, produces a schism in our Union. That would be an incurable
evil, because near friends falling out, never re-unite cordially;
whereas, all of us going together, we shall be sure to cure the evils
of our new Constitution, before they do great harm. The box of books I
had taken the liberty to address to you, is but just gone from Havre
for New York. I do not see, at present, any symptoms strongly
indicating war. It is true, that the distrust existing between the two
courts of Versailles and London, is so great, that they can scarcely do
business together. However, the difficulty and doubt of obtaining money
make both afraid to enter into war. The little preparations for war,
which we see, are the effect of distrust, rather than of a design to
commence hostilities. And in such a state of mind, you know, small
things may produce a rupture; so that though peace is rather probable,
war is very possible.

Your letter has kindled all the fond recollections of ancient times;
recollections much dearer to me than anything I have known since. There
are minds which can be pleased by honors and preferments; but I see
nothing in them but envy and enmity. It is only necessary to possess
them, to know how little they contribute to happiness, or rather how
hostile they are to it. No attachments soothe the mind so much as those
contracted in early life; nor do I recollect any societies which have
given me more pleasure, than those of which you have partaken with me.
I had rather be shut up in a very modest cottage, with my books, my
family and a few old friends, dining on simple bacon, and letting the
world roll on as it liked, than to occupy the most splendid post, which
any human power can give. I shall be glad to hear from you often. Give
me the small news as well as the great. Tell Dr. Currie, that I believe
I am indebted to him a letter, but that like the mass of our
countrymen, I am not, at this moment, able to pay all my debts; the
post being to depart in an hour, and the last stroke of a pen I am able
to send by it, being that which assures you of the sentiments of esteem
and attachment, with which I am, dear Sir, your affectionate friend and
servant.




TO MR. WARVILLE.

PARIS, February 12, 1788.


SIR,--I am very sensible of the honor you propose to me, of becoming a
member of the society for the abolition of the slave trade. You know
that nobody wishes more ardently to see an abolition, not only of the
trade, but of the condition of slavery; and certainly, nobody will be
more willing to encounter every sacrifice for that object. But the
influence and information of the friends to this proposition in France
will be far above the need of my association. I am here as a public
servant, and those whom I serve, having never yet been able to give
their voice against the practice, it is decent for me to avoid too
public a demonstration of my wishes to see it abolished. Without
serving the cause here, it might render me less able to serve it beyond
the water. I trust you will be sensible of the prudence of those
motives, therefore, which govern my conduct on this occasion, and be
assured of my wishes for the success of your undertaking, and the
sentiments of esteem and respect, with which I have the honor to be,
Sir, your most obedient humble servant.




TO MR. DUMAS.

PARIS, Feb. 12, 1788.


SIR,--I have duly received your favor of the 5th inst. enclosing that
for Mr. Jay. The packet was gone, as I presume, but I have another
occasion of forwarding it securely. Your attentions to the Leyden
gazette are, in my opinion, very useful. The paper is much read and
respected. It is the only one I know in Europe which merits respect.
Your publications in it will tend to re-establish that credit which the
solidity of our affairs deserve. With respect to the sale of lands, we
know that two sales of five millions and two millions of acres have
been made. Another was begun for four millions, which, in the course of
the negotiation, may have been reduced to three millions, as you
mention. I have not heard that this sale is absolutely concluded, but
there is reason to presume it. Stating these sales at two-thirds of a
dollar the acre, and allowing for 3 or 400,000 acres sold at public
sale, and a very high price, we may say they have absorbed seven
millions of dollars of the domestic federal debt. The States, by
taxation and otherwise, have absorbed eleven millions more: so that
debt stands now at about ten millions of dollars, and will probably be
all absorbed in the course of the next year. There will remain then our
foreign debt, between ten and twelve millions, including interest. The
sale of lands will then go on for the payment of this. But, as this
payment must be in cash, not in public effects, the lands must be sold
cheaper. The demand will probably be less brisk. So we may suppose this
will be longer paying off than the domestic debt. With respect to the
new Government, nine or ten States will probably have accepted by the
end of this month. The others may oppose it. Virginia, I think, will be
of this number. Besides other objections of less moment, she will
insist on annexing a bill of rights to the new Constitution, _i. e._ a
bill wherein the Government shall declare that, 1. Religion shall be
free; 2. Printing presses free; 3. Trials by jury preserved in all
cases; 4. No monopolies in commerce; 5. No standing army. Upon
receiving this bill of rights, she will probably depart from her other
objections; and this bill is so much to the interest of all the States,
that I presume they will offer it, and thus our Constitution be
amended, and our Union closed by the end of the present year. In this
way, there will have been opposition enough to do good, and not enough
to do harm. I have such reliance on the good sense of the body of the
people, and the honesty of their leaders, that I am not afraid of their
letting things go wrong to any length in any cause. Wishing you better
health, and much happiness, I have the honor to be, with sentiments of
the most perfect esteem and respect, Sir, your most obedient, and most
humble servant.




TO MONSIEUR DE BERTROUS.

PARIS, Feb. 21, 1788.


SIR,--I am now to acknowledge the receipt of the letter you did me the
honor to write me on the 21st of January, together with the book on the
culture of the olive tree. This is a precious present to me, and I pray
you to accept my thanks for it. I am just gratified by letters from
South Carolina, which inform me that in consequence of the information
I had given them on the subject of the olive tree, and the probability
of its succeeding with them, several rich individuals propose to begin
its culture there. This will not interfere with the commerce of France,
because she imports much more oil than she exports, and because the
consumption of oil in the United States at present, is so
inconsiderable, that should their demand be totally withdrawn at the
European market, and supplied at home, it will produce no sensible
effect in Europe. We can never produce that article in very great
quantity, because it happens that in our two southernmost States, where
only the climate is adapted to the olive, the soil is so generally rich
as to be unfit for that tree, and proper for other productions of more
immediate profit. I am to thank you, also, for the raisins of Smyrna,
without seed, which I received from you through Mr. Grand. * * * * *




TO MONSIEUR TROUCHIN.

PARIS, February 26, 1788.


SIR,--I should with great cheerfulness have done anything I could for
the manufacturers of Bourges, had anything been in my power. To this I
should have been induced by justice to them, and a desire to serve
whomsoever you befriend. This company is part of a great mass of
creditors to whom the United States contracted debts during the late
war. Those States, like others, are not able to pay immediately all the
debts which the war brought on them; but they are proceeding rapidly in
that payment, and will, perhaps, get through it more speedily than any
nation ever did before.

You will have seen in the public papers the progress they are making in
this matter. They proceed in this by fixed rules, from which it is
their principle never to depart in any instance, nor to do on any
account for any one person what they will not be able to do for all
others claiming on the same grounds. This company should engage the
French Consul, or some other person on the spot, to be always ready to
present their claim whenever anything can be received on it, according
to the order of payment established by Congress. I suppose that the
interest might have been annually received. With respect to what they
call the reduction of the debt from its nominal sum, it is not a
reduction of it, but an appreciation at its true value. The public
effects of the United States, such as their paper bills of credit, loan
office bills, etc., were a commodity which varied its value from time
to time. A scale of their value for every month has been settled
according to what they sold for at market, in silver or gold. This
value in gold or silver, with an interest of six per cent. annually
till payment, is what the United States pay. This they are able to pay;
but were they to propose to pay off all their paper, not according to
what it cost the holder, in gold or silver, but according to the sum
named in it, their whole country, if sold, and all their persons into
the bargain, might not suffice. They would, in this case, make a
bankruptcy where none exists, as an individual, who being very able to
pay the real debts he has contracted, would undertake to give to every
man fifty times as much as he had received from him. The company will
receive the market value of the public effects they have on their
hands, and six per cent. per annum on that; and I can only repeat my
advice to them, to appoint some friend on the spot to act for them
whenever anything can be received. I have the honor to be, with
sentiments of the most perfect esteem and respect, Sir, your most
obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MR. JOHN ADAMS.

PARIS, March 2, 1788.--Sunday.


DEAR SIR,--I received this day, a letter from Mrs. Adams, of the 26th
ultimo, informing me you would set out on the 29th, for the Hague. Our
affairs at Amsterdam press on my mind like a mountain. I have no
information to go on, but that of Willincks and Van Staphorsts, and
according to that, something seems necessary to be done. I am so
anxious to confer with you on this subject, and to see you and them
together, and get some effectual arrangement made in time, that I
determine to meet you at the Hague. I will set out the moment some
repairs are made to my carriage; it is promised me at three o'clock
to-morrow; but probably they will make it night, and that I may not set
out till Tuesday morning. In that case, I shall be at the Hague on
Friday night; in the meantime, you will perhaps have made all your bows
there. I am sensible how irksome this must be to you, in the moment of
your departure. But it is a great interest of the United States which
is at stake, and I am sure you will sacrifice to that, your feelings
and your interest. I hope to shake you by the hand, within twenty-four
hours after you receive this; and in the meantime, I am, with much
esteem and respect, dear Sir, your affectionate friend and humble
servant.




TO THE HON. JOHN JAY.

AMSTERDAM, March 13, 1788.


SIR,--Mr. Adams having announced to our bankers here his approaching
departure from Europe, and referred them to me for counsel on our
affairs in their hands, they sent me a state of them, and of the
difficulties which were pressing at the moment, and impending more
seriously for the month of June. They were urging me by almost every
post on this subject. In this situation, information of Mr. Adams'
journey of leave to the Hague reached me on the day of his arrival
there. I was sensible how important it was to have the benefit of his
interference in a department which had been his peculiarly from the
beginning, and with all the details of which he was as intimately
acquainted as I was little so. I set out therefore in the instant,
joined him at the Hague, and he readily concurred with me in the
necessity of our coming here to confer with our bankers on the measures
which might be proper and practicable. We are now engaged on this
subject, and the result, together with a full explanation of the
difficulties which commanded our attention, shall be the subject of a
letter which I shall do myself the honor of writing you by Mr. Adams,
to be forwarded by Colonel Smith, who will go in the English packet. I
avoid further particulars in the present letter, because it is to pass
through the different post-offices to Paris. It will be forwarded
thence by Mr. Short, whom I have desired to do himself the honor of
writing to you any occurrences since my departure, which may be worthy
of being communicated, by the French packet of this month. I have the
honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect respect and esteem,
Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO THE HON. JOHN JAY.

AMSTERDAM, March 16, 1788.


SIR,--In a letter of the 13th instant, which I had the honor of
addressing you from this place, I mentioned in general terms, the
object of my journey hither, and that I should enter into more
particular details, by the confidential conveyance which would occur
through Mr. Adams and Colonel Smith.

The board of treasury had, in the month of December, informed me and
our bankers here, that it would be impossible for them to make any
remittances to Europe for the then ensuing year, and that they must,
therefore, rely altogether on the progress of the late loan. But this,
in the meantime, after being about one-third filled, had ceased to get
forward. The bankers who had been referred to me for advice by Mr.
Adams, stated those circumstances, and pressed their apprehension for
the ensuing month of June, when two hundred and seventy thousand
florins would be wanting for interest. In fine, they urged an offer of
the holders of the former bonds to take all those remaining on hand,
provided they might receive out of them the interest on a part of our
domestic debt, of which they had also become the holders. This would
have been one hundred and eighty thousand florins. To this proposition
I could not presume any authority to listen. Thus pressed between the
danger of failure on one hand, and this proposition on the other, I
heard of Mr. Adams being gone to the Hague, to take leave. His
knowledge of the subject was too valuable to be neglected under the
present difficulty, and it was the last moment in which we could be
availed of it. I set out immediately, therefore, for the Hague, and we
came on to this place together, in order to see what could be done. It
was easier to discover, than to remove, the causes which obstructed the
progress of the loan. Our affairs here, like those of other nations,
are in the hands of particular bankers. These employ particular, and
they have their particular circle of money lenders. These money
lenders, as I have before mentioned, while placing a part of their
money in our foreign loans, had at the same time employed another part
in a joint speculation, to the amount of eight hundred and forty
thousand dollars, in our domestic debt. A year's interest was becoming
due on this, and they wished to avail themselves of our want of money
for the foreign interest, to obtain payment of the domestic. Our first
object was to convince our bankers, that there was no power on this
side the Atlantic which could accede to this proposition, or give it
any countenance. They at length, therefore, but with difficulty,
receded from this ground, and agreed to enter into conferences with the
brokers and lenders, and to use every exertion to clear the loan from
the embarrassment in which this speculation had engaged it. What will
be the result of these conferences, is not yet known. We have hopes,
however, that it is not desperate, because the bankers consented
yesterday to pay off the capital of fifty-one thousand florins, which
had become due on the first day of January, and which had not yet been
paid. We have gone still further. The treasury-board gives no hope of
remittances, till the new government can procure them. For that
government to be adopted, its legislature assembled, its system of
taxation and collection arranged, the money gathered from the people
into the treasury, and then remitted to Europe, must extend
considerably into the year 1790. To secure our credit then, for the
present year only, is but to put off the evil day to the next. What
remains of the last loan, when it shall be filled up, will little more
than clear us of present demands, as may be seen by the estimate
enclosed. We thought it better, therefore, to provide at once for the
years 1789 and 1790, also; and thus to place the Government at its
ease, and her credit in security, during that trying interval. The same
estimate will show, that another million of florins will be necessary
to effect this. We stated this to our bankers, who concurred in our
views, and that to ask the whole sum at once, would be better than to
make demands from time to time so small, as that they betray to the
money holders the extreme feebleness of our resources. Mr. Adams,
therefore, has executed bonds for another million of florins; which,
however, are to remain unissued till Congress shall have ratified the
measure; so that this transaction is something or nothing, at their
pleasure. We suppose its expediency so apparent, as to leave little
doubt of its ratification. In this case, much time will have been saved
by the execution of the bonds at this moment, and the proposition will
be presented under a more favorable appearance, according to the
opinion of the bankers. Mr. Adams is under a necessity of setting out
to-morrow morning, but I shall stay two or three days longer, to attend
to and encourage the efforts of the bankers; though it is yet doubtful
whether they will ensure us a safe passage over the month of June. Not
having my letters here to turn to, I am unable to say whether the last
I wrote mentioned the declaration of the Emperor that he should take
part in the war against the Turks. This declaration appeared a little
before, or a little after that letter, I do not recollect which. Some
little hostilities have taken place between them. The court of
Versailles seems to pursue immovably its pacific system, and from every
appearance in the country from which I write, we must conclude that its
tragedy is wound up. The triumph appears complete, and tranquillity
perfectly established. The numbers who have emigrated are differently
estimated, from twenty to forty thousand.

A little before I left Paris, I received a piece of intelligence, which
should be communicated, leaving you to lay what stress on it, it may
seem to deserve. Its authenticity may be surely relied on. At the time
of the late pacification, Spain had about fifteen ships of the line
nearly ready for sea. The convention for disarming did not extend to
her, nor did she disarm. This gave inquietude to the court of London,
and they demanded an explanation. One was given, they say, which is
perfectly satisfactory. The Russian Minister at Versailles, getting
knowledge of this, became suspicious on his part. He recollected that
Spain, during the late war, had been opposed to the entrance of a
Russian fleet into the Mediterranean, and concluded if England was not
the object of this armament, Russia might be. It is known that that
power means to send a fleet of about twenty-four ships into the
Mediterranean this summer. He sent to the Count de Montmorin, and
expressed his apprehensions. The Count de Montmorin declared that the
object of Spain in that armament, was totally different; that he was
not sure she would succeed; but that France and Spain were to be
considered as one, and that the former would become guarantee for the
latter; that she would make no opposition to the Russian fleet. If
neither England nor Russia be the object, the question recurs, who is
it for? You know best if our affairs with Spain are in a situation to
give jealousy to either of us. I think it very possible that the
satisfaction of the court of London may have been pretended, or
premature. It is possible, also, that the affairs of Spain in South
America, may require them to assume a threatening appearance. I give
you the facts, however, and you will judge whether they are objects of
attention or of mere curiosity.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of sincere esteem and respect,
Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.

P. S. I enclose herewith an extract of a letter from the Count de
Vergennes to the French Ambassador at the Hague, which will make a
remarkable chapter in the history of the late revolution here. It is
not public, nor should be made so by us. Probably those who have been
the victims of it, will some day publish it.




TO MR. DUMAS.

AMSTERDAM, March 29, 1788.


SIR,--I have now to acknowledge the receipt of your favors of the 14th,
18th and 23d instant. I would have preferred doing it in person, but
the season, and the desire of seeing what I have not yet seen, invite
me to take the route of the Rhine, I shall leave this place to-morrow
morning, and probably not reach Paris till the latter end of April. In
the moment we were to have conferred on the subject of paying the
arrears due to you, a letter of the 20th of February from the Board of
Treasury was received, forbidding the application of money to any
purpose, (except our current claims,) till the June interest should be
actually in hand. Being by the letter tied up from giving an order in
your favor, I return you the letter you had written to Mr. Jay, on the
supposition that the order for your arrears was given. It has been
suggested, however, that if you could receive bonds of the loan, you
could make them answer your purpose, and the commissioners say this
would in no wise interfere with the views of the treasury board, nor
the provision for the June interest. I have, therefore, recommended to
them in writing, to give you bonds to the amount of your balance, if
you choose to take them, rather than to wait. I wish this may answer
your purpose. I remember that in the conversation which I had the honor
of having with you, on the evening I was at the Hague, you said that
your enemies had endeavored to have it believed that Congress would
abandon you, and withdraw your appointments. An enemy generally says
and believes what he wishes, and your enemies particularly, are not
those who are most in the councils of Congress, nor the best qualified
to tell what Congress will do. From the evidences you have received of
their approbation, and from their well-known steadiness and justice,
you must be assured of a continuance of their favor, were they to
continue under the present form. Nor do I see anything in the new
government which threatens us with less firmness. The Senate, who will
make and remove their foreign officers, must, from its constitution, be
a wise and steady body. Nor would a new government begin its
administration by discarding old servants; servants who have put all to
the risk, and when the risk was great, to obtain that freedom and
security under which themselves will be what they shall be. Upon the
whole, my dear Sir, tranquillize yourself and your family upon this
subject. All the evidence which exists as yet, authorizes you to do
this, nor can I foresee any cause of disquiet in future. That none may
arise, that yourself and family may enjoy health, happiness, and the
continued approbation of those by whom you wish most to be approved, is
the sincere wish of him, who has the honor to be, with sentiments of
sincere esteem and attachment, your most obedient, and most humble
servant.




TO THE COMMISSIONERS OF THE TREASURY.

AMSTERDAM, March 29, 1788.


GENTLEMEN, * * * * * *

I cannot close my letter without some observations on the transfer of
our domestic debt to foreigners. This circumstance and the failure to
pay off Fiseaux' loan, were the sole causes of the stagnation of our
late loan. For otherwise, our credit would have stood on more hopeful
grounds than heretofore. There was a condition in the last loan, that
the lenders furnished one-third of the money, the remaining two-thirds
of the bonds should remain eighteen months unsold, and at their option
to take or not, and that in the meantime the same bankers should open
no other loan for us. These same lenders became purchasers of our
domestic debt, and they were disposed to avail themselves of the power
they had thus acquired over us as to our foreign demands, to make us
pay the domestic one. Should the present necessities have obliged you
to comply with their proposition for the present year, I should be of
opinion it ought to be the last instance. If the transfer of these
debts to Europe, meet with any encouragement from us, we can no more
borrow money here, let our necessities be what they will. For who will
give ninety-six per cent. for the foreign obligations of the same
nation, whose domestic ones can be bought at the same market for
fifty-five per cent.; the former, too, bearing an interest of only five
per cent., while the latter yields six. If any discouragements can be
honestly thrown on this transfer, it would seem advisable, in order to
keep the domestic debt at home. It would be a very effectual one, if,
instead of the title existing in our treasury books alone, it was made
to exist in loose papers, as our loan office debts do. The European
holder would then be obliged to risk the title paper of his capital, as
well as his interest, in the hands of his agents in America, whenever
the interest was to be demanded; whereas, at present, he trusts him
with the interest only. This single circumstance would put a total stop
to all future sales of domestic debt at this market. Whether this, or
any other obstruction, can or should be thrown in the way of these
operations, is not for me to decide; but I have thought the subject
worthy your consideration.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem and
respect, Gentlemen, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MR. SHORT.

AMSTERDAM, March 29, 1788.


DEAR SIR,--I have received from you three letters of March the 9th,
14th, and 17th, and written you two of the 10th and 13th. In the last,
I mentioned to you that I should leave this place the 13th but I have
been drawn on from day to day by the hope of seeing the business on
which I came settled, on the basis of positive engagement, and the
great object of the month of June appeared so sure, that we were about
proceeding to immediate payment of Mr. Grand, the State of Virginia,
and all smaller claims, when a letter of the 20th February, from the
Commissioners of the Treasury, arrived, forbidding the application of
money to any object except the diplomatic expenses, till the cash for
the June interest was actually in hand. No room was left for the
bankers to execute their discretion. The consequence is a delay of all
other objects for some weeks, which probably might have been effected
instantly, without danger to the great one. Indeed, I had obtained a
positive engagement on that ground. Be so good as to communicate this
much to Mr. Grand.

A letter from Mr. Van Berkel, at New York, confirms the arrival of the
Count de Moustier there on the 18th of January, and removes all
suspense and anxiety on that subject. You know we received a similar
account the day before I left Paris, which I communicated to M. de
Montmorin. It is with infinite affliction that I recollect, in the
hurry of my departure, to have omitted to have notified the same to M.
Dupont, who had a son embarked in the same bottom. I am haunted with
this recollection, and would beg either yourself or Mr. Grand,
whichever sees M. Dupont first, to let him know that it was neither
want of attention nor attachment to him which occasioned it to escape
me, but the confusion which attended the setting out on such a journey
on so short notice.

I set out to-morrow for Utrecht, Nimeguen, etc., and shall pursue the
course of the Rhine as far as the roads will permit me, not exceeding
Strasburg. Whenever they become impassable, or too difficult, if they
do become so, I shall turn off to Paris. So also if anything of
importance should call for me at Paris sooner, you will be so good as
to address to me at Frankfort and Strasburg. I will call at the post
office there, and be happy to find news from you relative to yourself,
my daughters, and America. I shall be at Frankfort about the 8th of
April, and at Strasburg about the 15th. You shall hear from me on the
road.

                 *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *




TO GENERAL WASHINGTON.

PARIS, May 2, 1788.


DEAR SIR,--I am honored with your Excellency's letter by the last
packet, and thank you for the information it contains on the
communication between the Cayahoga and Big Beaver. I have ever
considered the opening a canal between those two water courses as the
most important work in that line which the State of Virginia could
undertake. It will infallibly turn through the Potomac all the commerce
of Lake Erie, and the country west of that, except what may pass down
the Mississippi; and it is important that it be soon done, lest that
commerce should, in the meantime, get established in another channel.
Having, in the spring of the last year, taken a journey through the
southern parts of France, and particularly examined the canal of
Languedoc, through its whole course, I take the liberty of sending you
the notes I made on the spot, as you may find in them something,
perhaps, which may be turned to account, some time or other, in the
prosecution of the Potomac canal. Being merely a copy from my
travelling notes, they are undigested and imperfect, but may still
perhaps give hints capable of improvement in your mind.

The affairs of Europe are in such a state still, that it is impossible
to say what form they will take ultimately. France and Prussia, viewing
the Emperor as their most dangerous and common enemy, had heretofore
seen their common safety as depending on a strict connection with one
another. This had naturally inclined the Emperor to the scale of
England, and the Empress also, as having views in common with the
Emperor, against the Turks. But these two powers would, at any time,
have gladly quitted England, to coalesce with France, as being the
power which they met everywhere, opposed as a barrier to all their
schemes of aggrandisement. When, therefore, the present King of Prussia
took the eccentric measure of bidding defiance to France, by placing
his brother in law on the throne of Holland, the two empires
immediately seized the occasion of soliciting an alliance with France.
The motives for this appeared so plausible, that it was believed the
latter would have entered into this alliance, and that thus, the whole
political system of Europe would have taken a new form. What has
prevented this court from coming into it, we know not. The unmeasurable
ambition of the Emperor, and his total want of moral principle and
honor, are suspected. A great share of Turkey, the recovery of Silesia,
the consolidation of his dominions by the Bavarian exchange, the
liberties of the Germanic body, all occupy his mind together, and his
head is not well enough organized, to pursue so much only of all this
as is practicable. Still, it was thought that France might safely have
coalesced with these powers, because Russia and herself, holding close
together, as their interests would naturally dictate, the Emperor could
never stir but with their permission. France seems, however, to have
taken the worst of all parties, that is, none at all. She folds her
arms, lets the two empires go to work to cut up Turkey as they can, and
holds Prussia aloof, neither as a friend nor foe. This is withdrawing
her opposition from the two empires, without the benefit of any
condition whatever. In the meantime, England has clearly overreached
herself. She excited the war between the Russians and Turks, in hopes
that France, still supporting the Turks, would be embarrassed with the
two empires. She did not foresee the event which has taken place, of
France abandoning the Turks, and that which may take place, of her
union with the two empires. She allied herself with Holland, but cannot
obtain the alliance of Prussia. This latter power would be very glad to
close again the breach with France, and, therefore, while there remains
an opening for this, holds off from England, whose fleets could not
enter into Silesia, to protect that from the Emperor. Thus, you see,
that the old system is unhinged, and no new one hung in its place.
Probabilities are rather in favor of a connection between the two
empires, France and Spain. Several symptoms show themselves, of
friendly dispositions between Russia and France, unfriendly ones
between Russia and England, and such as are barely short of hostility
between England and France. But into real hostilities, this country
would with difficulty be drawn. Her finances are too deranged, her
internal union too much dissolved, to hazard a war. The nation is
pressing on fast to a fixed constitution. Such a revolution in the
public opinion has taken place, that the crown already feels its powers
bounded, and is obliged, by its measures, to acknowledge limits. A
States General will be called at some epoch not distant; they will
probably establish a civil list, and leave the government to temporary
provisions of money, so as to render frequent assemblies of the
national representative necessary. How that representative will be
organized is yet uncertain. Among a thousand projects, the best seems
to me, that of dividing them into two Houses, of Commons and Nobles;
the Commons to be chosen by the Provincial Assemblies, who are chosen
themselves by the people, and the Nobles by the body of Noblesse, as in
Scotland. But there is no reason to conjecture that this is the
particular scheme which will be preferred.

The war between the Russians and Turks, has made an opening for our
Commodore Paul Jones. The Empress has invited him into her service. She
insures to him the rank of rear admiral; will give him a separate
command, and, it is understood, that he is never to be commanded. I
think she means to oppose him to the Captain Pacha, on the Black Sea.
He is by this time, probably, at St. Petersburg. The circumstances did
not permit his awaiting the permission of Congress, because the season
was close at hand for opening the campaign. But he has made it a
condition, that he shall be free at all times to return to the orders
of Congress, whenever they shall please to call for him; and also, that
he shall not in any case be expected to bear arms against France. I
believe Congress had it in contemplation, to give him the grade of
admiral, from the date of his taking the Serapis. Such a measure now
would greatly gratify him, second the efforts of fortune in his favor,
and better the opportunities of improving him for our service, whenever
the moment shall come in which we may want him.

The danger of our incurring something like a bankruptcy in Holland,
which might have been long, and even fatally felt in a moment of
crisis, induced me to take advantage of Mr. Adams' journey to take
leave at the Hague to meet him there, get him to go on to Amsterdam,
and try to avert the impending danger. The moment of paying a great sum
of annual interest was approaching. There was no money on hand, the
board of treasury had notified that they could not remit any; and the
progress of the loan which had been opened there, had absolutely
stopped. Our bankers there gave me notice of all this; and that a
single day's failure in the payment of interest would have the most
fatal effect on our credit. I am happy to inform you we were able to
set the loan a going again, and that the evil is at least postponed.
Indeed, I am tolerably satisfied, that if the measures we proposed are
ratified by Congress, all European calls for money (except the French
debt) are secure enough, till the end of the year 1790; by which time,
we calculated that the new government might be able to get money into
their treasury. Much conversation with the bankers, brokers and money
holders, gave me insight into the state of national credit there, which
I had never before been able satisfactorily to get. The English credit
is the first, because they never open a loan, without laying and
appropriating taxes for the payment of the interest, and there has
never been an instance of their failing one day, in that payment. The
Emperor and Empress have good credit, because they use it little, and
have hitherto been very punctual. This country is among the lowest, in
point of credit. Ours stands in hope only. They consider us as the
surest nation on earth for the repayment of the capital; but as the
punctual payment of interest is of absolute necessity in their
arrangements, we cannot borrow but with difficulty and disadvantage.
The moneyed men, however, look towards our new government with a great
degree of partiality, and even anxiety. If they see that set out on the
English plan, the first degree of credit will be transferred to us. A
favorable occasion will arise to our new government of asserting this
ground to themselves. The transfer of the French debt, public and
private, to Amsterdam, is certainly desirable. An act of the new
government, therefore, for opening a loan in Holland for the purpose,
laying taxes at the same time, for paying annually the interest and a
part of the principal, will answer the two valuable purposes, of
ascertaining the degree of our credit, and of removing those causes of
bickering and irritation, which should never be permitted to subsist
with a nation, with which it is so much our interest to be on cordial
terms as with France. A very small portion of this debt, I mean that
part due to the French officers, has done us an injury, of which, those
in office in America, cannot have an idea. The interest is unpaid for
the last three years; and these creditors, highly connected, and at the
same time needy, have felt and communicated hard thoughts of us.
Borrowing, as we have done, three hundred thousand florins a year, to
pay our interest in Holland, it would have been worth while to have
added twenty thousand more to suppress those clamors. I am anxious
about everything which may affect our credit. My wish would be, to
possess it in the highest degree, but to use it little. Were we without
credit, we might be crushed by a nation of much inferior resources, but
possessing higher credit. The present system of war renders it
necessary to make exertions far beyond the annual resources of the
State, and to consume in one year the efforts of many. And this system
we cannot change. It remains then, that we cultivate our credit with
the utmost attention.

I had intended to have written a word to your Excellency on the subject
of the new Constitution, but I have already spun out my letter to an
immoderate length. I will just observe, therefore, that according to my
ideas, there is a great deal of good in it. There are two things,
however, which I dislike strongly. 1. The want of a declaration of
rights. I am in hopes the opposition of Virginia will remedy this, and
produce such a declaration. 2. The perpetual re-eligibility of the
President. This, I fear, will make that an office for life, first, and
then hereditary. I was much an enemy to monarchies before I came to
Europe. I am ten thousand times more so, since I have seen what they
are. There is scarcely an evil known in these countries, which may not
be traced to their king, as its source, nor a good, which is not
derived from the small fibres of republicanism existing among them. I
can further say, with safety, there is not a crowned head in Europe,
whose talents or merits would entitle him to be elected a vestryman, by
the people of any parish in America. However, I shall hope, that before
there is danger of this change taking place in the office of President,
the good sense and free spirit of our countrymen, will make the changes
necessary to prevent it. Under this hope, I look forward to the general
adoption of the new Constitution with anxiety, as necessary for us
under our present circumstances. I have so much trespassed on your
patience already, by the length of this letter, that I will add nothing
further, than those assurances of sincere esteem and attachment with
which I have the honor to be, your Excellency's most obedient, and most
humble servant.




TO MR. JAMES MADISON.

PARIS, May 3, 1788.


DEAR SIR,--Mine of February the 6th, acknowledged the receipt of yours
of December the 9th and 20th; since that, those of February the 19th
and 20th have come to hand. The present will be delivered to you by Mr.
Warville, whom you will find truly estimable, and a great enthusiast
for liberty. His writings will have shown you this.

For public news, I must refer you to my letters to Mr. Jay. Those I
wrote to him from Amsterdam will have informed you of my journey
thither. While there, I endeavored to get, as well as I could, into the
state of national credit there; for though I am an enemy to the using
our credit but under absolute necessity, yet the possessing a good
credit I consider as indispensable, in the present system of carrying
on war. The existence of a nation having no credit is always
precarious. The credit of England is the best. Their paper sells at par
on the exchange of Amsterdam the moment any of it is offered, and they
can command there any sum they please. The reason is, that they never
borrow, without establishing taxes for the payment of the interest, and
they never yet failed one day in that payment. The Emperor and Empress
have good credit enough. They use it little and have been ever
punctual. This country cannot borrow at all there; for though they
always pay their interest within the year, yet it is often some months
behind. It is difficult to assign to our credit its exact station in
this scale. They consider us as the most certain nation on earth for
the principal; but they see that we borrow of themselves to pay the
interest, so that this is only a conversion of their interest into
principal. Our paper, for this reason, sells for from four to eight per
cent. below par, on the exchange, and our loans are negotiated with the
Patriots only. But the whole body of money dealers, Patriot and
Stadtholderian, look forward to our new government with a great degree
of partiality and interest. They are disposed to have much confidence
in it, and it was the prospect of its establishment, which enabled us
to set the loan of last year into motion again. They will attend
steadfastly to its first money operations. If these are injudiciously
begun, correction, whenever they shall be corrected, will come too
late. Our borrowings will always be difficult and disadvantageous. If
they begin well, our credit will immediately take the first station.
Equal provision for the interest, adding to it a certain prospect for
the principal, will give us a preference to all nations, the English
not excepted. The first act of the new government should be some
operation, whereby they may assume to themselves this station. Their
European debts form a proper subject for this. Digest the whole, public
and private, Dutch, French and Spanish, into a table, showing the sum
of interest due every year, and the portions of principal payable the
same year. Take the most certain branch of revenue, and one which shall
suffice to pay the interest, and leave such a surplus as may accomplish
all the payments of the capital, at terms somewhat short of those at
which they will become due. Let the surplusses of those years, in which
no reimbursement of principal falls, be applied to buy up our paper on
the exchange of Amsterdam, and thus anticipate the demands of
principal. In this way, our paper will be kept up at par; and this
alone will enable us to command in four and twenty hours, at any time,
on the exchange of Amsterdam, as many millions as that capital can
produce. The same act which makes this provision for the existing
debts, should go on to open a loan to their whole amount; the produce
of that loan to be applied, as fast as received, to the payment of such
parts of the existing debts as admit of payment. The rate of interest
to be as the government should privately instruct their agent, because
it must depend on the effect these measures would have on the exchange.
Probably it could be lowered from time to time. Honest and annual
publications of the payments made will inspire confidence, while
silence would conceal nothing from those interested to know.

You will perceive by the _compte rendu_ which I send you, that this
country now calls seriously for its interest at least. The non-payment
of this, hitherto, has done our credit little injury, because the
government here, saying nothing about it, the public have supposed they
wished to leave us at our ease as to the payment. It is now seen that
they call for it, and they will publish annually the effect of that
call. A failure here, therefore, will have the same effect on our
credit hereafter, as a failure at Amsterdam. I consider it then, as of
a necessity not to be dispensed with, that these calls be effectually
provided for. If it shall be seen that the general provision, before
hinted at, cannot be in time, then it is the present Government which
should take on itself to borrow in Amsterdam, what may be necessary.
The new Government should by no means be left by the old, to the
necessity of borrowing a stiver, before it can tax for its interest.
This will be to destroy the credit of the new Government in its birth.
And I am of opinion, that if the present Congress will add to the loan
of a million (which Mr. Adams and myself have proposed this year) what
may be necessary for the French calls to the year 1790, the money can
be obtained at the usual disadvantage. Though I have not, at this
moment, received such authentic information from our bankers as I may
communicate to Congress, yet I know privately from one of them, (Mr.
Jacob Van Staphorst, who is here,) that they had on hand a fortnight
ago, four hundred thousand florins, and the sale going on well. So that
the June interest, which had been in so critical a predicament, was
already secured. If the loan of a million on Mr. Adams' bonds of this
year, be ratified by Congress, the applications of the money on hand
may go on immediately, according to the statement I sent to Mr. Jay.
One article in this, I must beg you to press on the treasury board;
that is, an immediate order for the payment of the three years'
arrearages to the French officers. They were about holding a meeting to
take desperate measures on this subject, when I was called to Holland.
I desired them to be quiet till my return, and since my return, I have
pressed a further tranquillity till July, by which time, I have given
them reason to hope I may have an answer from the treasury board, to my
letters of March. Their ill humor can be contained no longer, and as I
know no reason why they may not be paid at that time, I shall have
nothing to urge in our defence after that.

                 *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

You remember the report, drawn by Governor Randolph, on the navigation
of the Mississippi. When I came to Europe, Mr. Thompson was so kind as
to have me a copy of it made out. I lent it to Dr. Franklin, and he
mislaid it, so that it could never be found. Could you make interest
with him to have me another copy made, and send it to me? By Mr.
Warville I send your pedometer. To the loop at the bottom of it, you
must sew a tape, and at the other end of the tape, a small hook, (such
as we use under the name of hooks and eyes) cut a little hole in the
bottom of your left watch pocket, pass the hook and tape through it,
and down between the breeches and drawers, and fix the hook on the edge
of your knee band, an inch from the knee buckle; then hook the
instrument itself by its swivel hook, on the upper edge of the watch
pocket. Your tape being well adjusted in length, your double steps will
be exactly counted by the instrument, the shortest hand pointing out
the thousands, the flat hand the hundreds, and the long hand the tens
and units. Never turn the hands backward; indeed, it is best not to set
them to any given place, but to note the number they stand at when you
begin to walk. The adjusting the tape to its exact length is a critical
business, and will cost you many trials. But once done, it is done for
ever. The best way is, to have a small buckle fixed on the middle of
the tape, by which you can take it up, and let it out at pleasure. When
you choose it should cease to count, unhook it from the top of the
watch pocket, and let it fall down to the bottom of the pocket.

                 *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

I am, with sentiments of the most sincere esteem and attachment, dear
Sir your affectionate friend and servant.




David Humphreys

(1752-1818)


David Humphreys fought through the Revolutionary War, and early in 1780
was selected as aide to General Washington with the rank of
Lieutenant-Colonel. Having particularly distinguished himself at the
siege of York, Congress voted him a handsome sword. In July, 1784, he
went to France as Secretary of Legation to Thomas Jefferson. In 1790 he
was appointed Minister to Portugal, and in 1797 accepted the office of
Minister to Spain, continuing at that post till 1802, after concluding
treaties with Tripoli and Algiers. In 1812 he took command of the
militia of Connecticut, and as a member of the Legislature was active
in reorganizing for the local defence. A collection of his writings was
published in 1804.




John Jay

(1745-1829)


John Jay was sent in 1774 as a delegate to the first Congress, and took
a leading part in its proceedings. He drew up the 'Address to the
People of Great Britain, and wrote the address issued by Congress in
1775 to the people of Canada. He was a leading member of the New York
Convention, serving on the most important committees, and actively
engaged in repelling invasions and suppressing Tory combinations. He
had a chief share in framing the Constitution of New York and in May,
1777, was appointed Chief Justice of New York. From December 1778 to
September, 1779 he was again a member of Congress. He was then
appointed Minister to Spain and with Adams, Franklin and others, signed
the treaty of peace between the United States and Great Britain on
September 3, 1783. In 1787 he united with Hamilton and Madison in
writing "The Federalist" to answer objections to the proposed Federal
Constitution, and contributed powerfully to its adoption. In 1788 he
was appointed Chief Justice of the United States, and from 1795 to 1801
was Governor of New York.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Writings of Thomas Jefferson, by 
Thomas Jefferson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WRITINGS OF THOMAS JEFFERSON ***

***** This file should be named 21002-8.txt or 21002-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/0/0/21002/

Produced by Robert Cicconetti and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.